D
r

UKl

FOREST ENGINEERING RESEARCH INSTITUTE OF CANADA
INSTITUT CANADIEN DE RECHERCHES EN GÉNIE FORESTIER

5/

Interior Limbing, Bucking
and Processing Study
Evaluation of Hahn
Tree- Length Delimber

LESLIE H. POWELL

Technical Note No. TN-51
December 1981

201 - 2112 West Broadway, Vancouver, B.C., Canada V6K 2C8
143 Place Frontenac, Pointe Claire, Québec, Canada H9R 4Z7

FOREWORD
FERIC's project on Interior Limbing, Bucking and Processing
represents an on-going search for machines and methods to
solve the problems of achieving high quality logs at reasonable cost. This Technical Note describes the evaluation of
one such machine , the Hahn Tree-Length De limber , which
delimbs and bucks full trees. Further studies of processing
machines will be made as new equipment is developed and
introduced.
FERIC wishes to thank personnel from the following companies
for their assistance and cooperation during this study：
Crown Zellerbach Canada Ltd. , Kelowna , B.C.
Duncan Logging, Kelowna, B.C.
Hahn Machinery Inc. , Two Harbors , Minnesota
Crows Nest Industries , Elko, B.C.
Crown Zellerbach Canada Ltd. , Courtenay, B.C.
The author gratefully acknowledges the help and assistance
of the other FERIC personnel who were involved with this
study.

i

CONTENTS
PAGE

FOREWORD

i

SUMMARY

S-l

SOMMAIRE

S-3

INTRODUCTION

1

TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION

1

OPERATING SEQUENCE

5

YARD LAYOUT AND OPERATING CONDITIONS

6

STUDY PROCEDURES

8

STUDY RESULTS

8

Shift Level Monitoring
Detailed Timing Results
Bucking Quality
Limbing Quality

8
10
12
13

COMPARISON WITH OTHER HAHN TREE-LENGTH DELIMBERS
IN B.C.

13

COST ESTIMATES

17

DISCUSSION

19

CONCLUSION

21

APPENDICES
APPENDIX

PAGE

I

Manufacturer's Specifications

23

II

Limbing Quality Guide

24

TABLES
TABLE

PAGE

1

Shift-Level Monitoring Summary

8

2

Summary of Repair Time

9

3

Summary of Loading Activity

1°

4

Summary of Processing Activity

11

5

Summary of Bucked Log Lengths

12

6

Comparison of Shift-Level Results

14

7

Comparison of Detailed Timing Results
for Processing Activities

16

FIGURES
FIGURE
A

PAGE
Hahn Tree-Length Delimber at
Peachland Yard

2

B

Infeed End of Hahn

3

C

close Views of Machine Components

4

D

Diagram of Yard Layout at Peachland

1

E

Push Cat Moving Full Trees

15

F

Hahn Tree-Length Delimber on
Vancouver Island

15

SUMMARY
The Hahn Tree-Length De limber is a delimbing and bucking
machine , which has been introduced into the Interior of B.C.
There are currently 5 units working in B .C. , four in the
Interior and one on Vancouver Island. The machine studied
was working in the central processing yard at Peachland,
delimbing and bucking full trees into desired log lengths
(usually 34 ft 8 in.) which were then trucked on-highway to
the mill.
The machine is a self-propelled rubber-tired unit. Its
chassis forms the working deck for the wrap-around knifetype de limber. Bucking and topping is done by a hydraulically operated chain saw. An electronic measuring device is
used to obtain accurate bucking. Full trees are fed into
the de limber by a knuckle-boom loader. After de limbing and
topping, logs are ejected onto the ground at the other end
of the machine. A front-end loader (Caterpillar 966C)
clears the processed logs and moves debris to the disposal
ditch where it is burnt. A two-man crew operated the Hahn,
one on the knuckle-boom loader and one controlling the delimbing and bucking. The machine weighs about 20 200 kg and
costs approximately $200,000 f.o.b. Vancouver.
This study collected both shift level information on actual
performance and detailed timing data for estimating potential productivity. Bucking accuracy was also studied. Results are compared with those from a second unit in the
Interior and the unit working on Vancouver Island.
During the 48 days of the study period , the Hahn processed
272 off-highway truckloads with a volume of 16 410 m 3
(= 42.5 m 3 /PMH). Daily production averaged 342 m 3 (or 5.7
truckloads) , which was almost one-half of the daily yard
throughput. The remaining volume was de limbed by a flail
and manually bucked. However , over the study period , the
daily production increased slowly, and reached almost 7
loads per day at the conclusion.
Machine availability was high at 87% and utilization of 84%
was also good. This latter shows that there were very few
non-mechanical delays. In comparison , the other Hahn working in the Interior produced 15 260 m 3 in 65 days (= 40.7
m 3 /PMH) and achieved a machine availability of 78% , with a

S-l

utilization of 67%. Some of the difference in production
resulted from the smaller tree size (.3 m 3 per tree compared
to .4 m 3 per tree at Peachland). Both machines were working
with lodgepole pine as the major species.
Detailed timing samples showed that the processing (delimbing and bucking) activity determines the potential productivity. An average off-highway truckload of 62.4 m 3 was
processed in 65.5 minutes , which equals 57.2 m 3 per productive machine hour. The Hahn actually processed only 78%
of the trees in a truckload. The remaining 22% did not need
processing and were transferred by its loader from the full
tree piles to the processed log pile.
Potential productivity estimates for both machines in the
Interior of B.C. were similar in terms of trees per PMH.
Again the larger tree size at Peachland influenced volume in
m 3 per PMH. The Hahn on Vancouver Island had longer cycle
times because there was only one operator. Potential
productivity for this machine was 85 trees per PMH. Average
tree size was .71 m 3 , and volume per PMH was estimated at
41.4 m 3 . Here also the effect of tree size was very noticeable , and offset the longer cycle times resulting from the
single operator.
This Technical Note presents some cost estimates for both
favourable and unfavourable conditions. These suggest that
with favourable conditions, the Hahn can process logs for a
comparable price to flail limbing with manual bucking.
There are also some general comments on all three machines
and their operating set-ups.
All three Hahns produced cleanly limbed and accurately
bucked logs. Two of them reported good machine availability
and utilization. These units have demonstrated their abilities to handle Interior wood , while the unit on Vancouver
Island has worked equally well with the smaller sizes of
coast timber.

S-2

SOMMAIRE
L'ébrancheuse-tronçonneuse Hahn est un engin forestier qui
a son apparition en Colombie-Britannique intérieure. Il y
a actuellement cinq de ces machines à 1'oeuvre dans la province , quatre dans la zone intérieure et une sur 1'île de
Vancouver. La machine étudiée, installée dans un parc central de façonnage à Peachland, ébranchait et tronçonnait des
arbres entiers en grumes de la longueur voulue (généralement
34 pi 8 po) , grumes qui étaient ensuite transportées par
camion sur la grand 'route jusqu'à 1 * usine.
L'engin est automoteur et monté sur des pneumatiques de
caoutchouc. Son châssis forme la plate-forme où se trouve
une tête d'ébranchage ă couteaux enveloppants. Le tronçonnage et 1'écimage sont effectués par une scie à chaîne a
commande hydraulique. Un dispositif électronique de mesure
des longueurs assure la précision du tronçonnage. Une
flèche d 'alimentation articulée amène les arbres entiers
jusqu'au dispositif d'ébranchage. Après 1 1 ébranchage et
1'écimage, les billes sont éjectées au sol à 1'autre extrémité de la machine. Une chargeuse frontale (Caterpillar
966 C) enlève les billes façonnées et porte les déchets
jusqu'a la fosse d'élimination où ils sont brûlés. Le fonctionnement de 1'ébrancheuse Hahn demande une équipe de deux
hommes, un à la flèche d 'alimentation articulée , et 1'autre
pour commander 1 1 ébranchage et le tronçonnage. L'engin pèse
environ 20 200 kg et son coût s'élève approximativement à
200 000$ f.o.b. Vancouver.
Au cours de 1'étude , on recueillit des données par poste de
travail sur la performance réelle , ainsi que des chronométrages détaillés permettant d 'estimer le potentiel de productivité. L'étude porta aussi sur la précision du tronçonnage. On y compare les résultats obtenus avec ceux qui
proviennent d'une seconde machine travaillant en Colombie
intérieure et de celle qui se trouve sur 1'île de Vancouver.
Durant les 48 jours que dura 1'étude , 1'ébrancheuse-tronçonneuse Hahn façonna 272 charges de camions de voie privée ,
soit un volume de 16 410 m 3 (42,5 m 3 /HMP ). La production
journalière s'élevait en moyenne à 342 m 3 (ou 5 ,7 charges
de camion) , ce qui atteignait presque la moitié des arrivages
journaliers du parc. Le volume de bois restant était ébranché par une ébrancheuse à fléaux et tronçonné à la main.

S-3

Cependant la production journalière augmenta peu à peu au
cours de 1'étude pour atteindre presque 7 charges par jour
vers la fin.
La machine avait une disponibilité élevée de 87% et un bon
taux d'utilisation de 84%. Ce dernier taux démontre qu'il
y eut très peu de temps morts d'ordre non-mécanique. Comparativement, 1'autre Hahn travaillant en zone intérieure
produisit 15 260 m 3 en 65 jours (= 40,7 m 3/HMP), soit une
disponibilité de 78% et en taux d ’utilisation de 67%. Une
part de la différence dans le volume produit résulte de la
plus faible taille des arbres (0,3 m 3 a 1'arbre par rapport
à 0,4 m 3 a Peachland). Dans les deux cas, le pin lodgepole
constituait 1'essence principale.
Des échantillons des chronométrages montraient que 1'ébranchage-tronçonnage constitue 1'activité déterminante du potentiel de productivité. Une charge moyenne de camion de
voie privée de 62,4 m 3 était façonnée en 65,5 minutes, ce
qui donne 57,2 m 3 par heure-machine productive. L'engin ne
façonnait en fait que 78% des arbres de la charge. Le reste,
soit 22% , n'avait pas besoin d'être façonné et passait, à
1'aide de la flèche d ’alimentation, directement de la pile
d 1 arbres entiers à la pile de grumes façonnées.
Les estimations du potentiel de productivité des deux machines utilisées en Colombie intérieure étaient semblables,
quant au nombre d 'arbres par HMP. Ici encore le volume plus
élevé des arbres à Peachland influença le volume en m 3 par
HMP. L* ébrancheuse-tronçonneuse Hahn se trouvant sur 1'île
de Vancouver avait des temps plus longs parce qu'elle n'avait
qu'un seul opérateur. Son potentiel de productivité atteignait 85 arbres par HMP. Le volume moyen des arbres était de
0,71 m 3 , et le volume par HMP était estimé M 41,4 m 3 . Ici
aussi 1'effet de la taille des arbres était remarquable, et
compensait les temps de fonctionnement plus longs dus à la
présence d'un seul opérateur.
On trouvera dans la présente fiche technique quelques estimations de coût dans des conditions favorables et défavorables. Elles laissent entendre que dans des conditions
favorables, 1'ébrancheuse-tronçonneuse Hahn peut façonner
les grumes à un coût comparable à 1'ébranchage au fléau suivi
d'un tronçonnage manuel. On trouvera également quelques
commentaires généraux sur les trois machines et 1 1organisation de chaque site de façonnage.

S-4

Les trois ébrancheuses-tronçonneuses Hahn produisaient des
grumes bien ébranchées et tronçonnées avec précision. Deux
d'entre elles faisaient preuve d'une bonne disponibilité et
d'un bon taux d'utilisation. Elles ont démontré leur aptitude
a traiter les arbres de la Colombie intérieure , alors que
celle qui se trouvait sur 1'île de Vancouver a également
donneé de bons résultats avec les arbres plus petits de la
région côtière.

S-5

INTRODUCTION
This Technical Note describes the use of a Hahn tree-length
delimbing and bucking machine in a central processing yard
in the Interior of B.C. Productivity figures come from both
shift-level and detailed time studies. Comparisons are made
with two other Hahns, one working in Interior B.C. and the
other in small timber on Vancouver Island.
In Interior B.C. about 75 percent of the wood harvested is
manually delimbed and bucked. The use of chain flail delimbers with manual bucking accounts for another 20 percent,
and the remainder is mechanically delimbed, bucked and topped. There is considerable industry interest in improving
the quality of delimbing and bucking. One approach to this
problem is the introduction of mechanized systems. So far ,
machines designed for eastern Canadian conditions are being
introduced in experiments to solve the problems. Sliding
boom delimbers and Hahn delimbers are handling the estimated
five percent of the harvest which is processed mechanically.
Sliding boom delimbers have been studied in Ontario and
Quebec , and show definite potential for Interior B.C. These
machines, however , only delimb and top. The Hahn includes a
bucking capability as well and has aroused much interest,
particularly in central processing yard applications.

TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION
The Hahn Tree-Length Delimber is a self-propelled machine.
It is a 4-wheeled machine with one steering axle and one
drive axle. The chassis forms the deck on which the delimbing head travels. There are four stabilizer legs which
raise the wheels off the ground and provide a solid working
position. The 119 kW engine is mounted off to one side
between the axles. The operator's cab is mounted at the
off-feed end of the unit. The knuckle-boom loader is
mounted at the other end on the opposite side by the engine
and fuel tanks. There is a second cab with the loader so
that two operators run the machine.

1

The delimbing head travels the length of the machine. It
is a wrap-around knife-type delimber, with 1 fixed and 4
movable knives. Two hydrostatically-driven chains move the
carriage back and forth. Below the operator's cab are the
holding arms which secure the tree while delimbing takes
place. Also there is a kick-out arm to eject the processed
log. There is a hydraulically-operated chainsaw mounted by
the engine house which bucks the trees or trims off butts
and defects as required.
The machine weighs 20 200 kg and the purchase price is
approximately $200,000. Figures A to C show the machine and
its main components. More detailed specifications are given
in Appendix I «

FIGURE A.

Hahn Tree-Length Delimber at
Peachland Yard.

2

MHH
■Bn

t
X?

i, ; ’‘k

r;

• ... *

FIGURE B.

A

*

,

Infeed of machine showing return of
carriage at end of delimbing. Details
of knives and limbing head are hidden
by limbs. Note the two trees being
processed at one time.

3

I
h
ill

I
§

FIGURE C.

Close views of machine components:
1) Limbing head
2) Cut-off saw
3) Holding arms
4) Kick-off arm

4

OPERATING SEQUENCE
The Hahn is positioned with the loader end close to the
butts of the full-tree pile. The outriggers are extended to
stabilize the machine. The loader then grapples a full
tree, releasing it from the pile , and places the butt end in
the de limber carriage. The limbing knives close firmly
clamping the tree in the limbing carriage. This then moves
to the opposite end of the machine and positions the tree on
the deck. Holding arms positioned below the main operator's
cab then clamp the butt of the tree. The pressure holding
the limbing knives is reduced, relaxing the clamping effect
but leaving the knives closed around the stem. Returning to
the loader end the carriage performs the de limbing function,
and carries the limbs and debris with it. Then the holding
arms are released and the limbing knives reclamped, allowing
the cycle to be repeated until all limbing is done. As the
butt of the tree moves out beyond the holding arms , an
electronic counter is tripped beginning measurement of log
lengths. At the desired length, the carriage is halted (on
the loader side of the cut-off saw) and bucking occurs. The
bucked log is then ejected away from the machine by the
kicker arm. Limbing continues until the desired top diameter is reached and the bucking saw then cuts off the top.
This second log is similarly ejected onto the pile of logs.
The top and limbs are carried back to the loader end and
ejected onto the ground. The limber carriage then accepts
the next tree and the cycle is repeated. With smaller trees
which only require limbing and topping, two or three trees
can be processed at the same time.
Any trees in the pile which do not need processing are removed by the loader and piled on the opposite side of the
machine, alongside the pile of processed logs. These are
then removed by a front-end loader and decked to await rehauling to the mill. Tops and debris are removed by the
same front-end loader , and stored along the edge of the yard
for subsequent disposal.
As each pile of full trees is processed, the Hahn will be
repositioned several times , keeping the trees within reach
of its knuckle-boom loader. At the end of processing a ~
pile, the unit moves on to the next pile.

5

YARD LAYOUT AND OPERATING CONDITIONS
Feller buncher wood was skidded to landings and roadside by
grapple skidder. Full trees were loaded onto off-highway
trucks by a Barko 450 Loader and hauled to the central processing yard at Peachland. Haul distance was about 35 km.
At the yard, the full trees were off-loaded by a Cat 966
wheeled front-end loader. The loads were simply pushed off.
The Hahn then delimbed the full trees and bucked them into
the required log lengths. The front-end loader removed the
processed logs and stored them in decks or loaded them directly onto highway trucks for the haul to the mill at
Kelowna. Limbs, tops and other cull material were moved by
the loader to the debris ditch where it was subsequently
burned.
Figure D shows the basic layout of the yard at Peachland.
In addition to the Hahn, some loads of full trees were
spread out, limbed using a flail, manually topped and bucked, and then decked. This ensured that the daily production
of the yard achieved the required 700 m 3.
Species processed in the yard were predominately lodgepole
pine, with some spruce and balsam. Tree size averaged
0.38 m 3 . Branchiness* of the full trees before limbing was
as follows:
class 1
class 2
class 3

82% of sample
13% of sample
5% of sample

Branchiness classes 2 and 3 were associated mostly with
spruce and balsam fir trees. Most of the pine exhibited
branchiness class 1.

*Tree branchiness is defined as follows:
class 1:
0 - 33% of stem bearing live branches
class 2: 34 - 66% of stem bearing live branches
class 3: 67 - 100% of stem bearing live branches

6

Mill at
Kelowna

Weight
Scale

I

Deck

Deck

'

966
loader
logs \

I
I
I

Deck

Area for check-sealing
off-highway loads

L

load highway trucks

966 '
loader
Hahn

FIGURE D.

Diagram of Yard Layout at Peachland.

Extra
Storage
Area

STUDY PROCEDURES
Shift level monitoring of machine time and production occurred over a three-month period. In addition , detailed timing
of the Hahn's working cycles was carried out to determine
the machine 1 s potential productivity. Log lengths were
measured to determine the accuracy of bucking. More details
of study procedures are available from FERIC on request.

STUDY RESULTS
SHIFT LEVEL MONITORING
Table 1 presents the results of the shift level monitoring
for the study period.

TABLE 1.

Shift Level Monitoring Sununary.

No. of shifts reported
No. of shifts worked

49
48

Scheduled Machine Hours (SMH)
Productive Machine Hours (PMH)
Mechanical delay time - repair hours
- service hours
Non-mechanical delay time (hours)

458.0
386.25
61.50

hr/shift
9.35
7.90
1.25

10.25

0.20

CPPA Machine Availability
CPPA Machine Utilization

86.6%
84.3%

No. of off-highway truck loads processed

272

Volume processed (based on average
truck volume of 60.3 m 3 )

16 410 m 3

Average piece size, m 3

.38

Average daily production
Average number of truck loads processed

342 m 3
5.7

8

Results show a 9.35 hr shift length which is explained by
the fact that this is a contractor operation , not a company
crew. No service time was recorded separately during the
study. Servicing of the machine was often performed during
the lunch period or during repair time, which explains the
zero hours reported.
Productive time (PMH) includes the time spent limbing and
bucking the full trees, and time spent moving , both while
processing each pile and travelling from one pile to the
next. It also includes minor delay times, such as waiting
for loaders to clear debris and clear processed logs. These
delays are normally expected to interrupt processing, but
only for short intervals of time.
Shift level monitoring shows an average time for limbing and
bucking each off-highway truck load at 1.39 hours (or 83
minutes). Average productivity based on these figures
equals 43.3 m 3 per PMH.
Table 2 shows a breakdown of the repair hours by machine
assembly, and gives number of repairs. Average time per
repair was 1.8 hours, and average time between repairs
equalled 13.5 scheduled hours or 11.4 productive machine
hours.
Non-mechanical delays averaged only 12 minutes per shift.
TABLE 2.

Summary of Repair Time.

Machine Assembly

Repair Time
hours
%

Limbing head
Cable for limber head

14.45
14.05

Kick-off arm
Cut-off saw
Loader
Undercarriage
Hydraulics

Number of
Repairs

Average Repair
Time, hr

23
23

8
7

1.8
2.0

11.70
5.00
2.25
10.65

19
8
4
17

3
4
4
5

3.9
1.2
0.6
2.1

3.40

6

3

1.1

61.50

100

34

1.8

9

DETAILED TIMING RESULTS

To determine the potential productivity of the Hahn, a sample of 12 off-highway loads was timed. Since the machine is
operated by 2 men , one feeding full trees into the limber
head, and the other controlling the processing , both activities were timed individually. From the timing, we can
see which function determines the machine's output.
Table 3 gives the results of timing the feeding activity.

TABLE 3.

Summary of Feeding Activity.

Activity

Time Per Truck Load
minutes
%

Time Per Tree
minutes

Feeding
Assisting feed into limber
Wait for limbing carriage
Move,
Delays

24.36
0.32
22.23
1.58
14.97

38.4
0.5
35.0
2.5
23.6

0.19
<0.01
0.17
0.01
0.12

Total loading time

63.46

100%

0.50

Assisting feed into limber occurred very infrequently. It
is the time spent when the loader holds a tree while the
limber carriage begins its processing cycle. It occurred
when a tree was jammed in the pile and the loader had been
unable to completely free it, and also for an occasional
crooked tree which did not fit properly into the limber
head. Delays include some mechanical downtime, but for the
most part comprises the time spent transferring trees and
logs which did not need processing from the full-tree piles
to the opposite side of the machine. From here the loader
would reclaim them for decking with the processed logs.
Table 4 summarises the times for the processing activities.

10

TABLE 4.

Sunmary of Processing Activity.

Activity

Time Per Truck Load
%
minutes

Time Per Tree
minutes

Delimbing and bucking
Waiting for trees
Delays (including
moving, clearing
debris, etc.)

51.61
4.98
8.91

78.8
7.6
13.6

0.40
0.04
0.07

Total processing time

65.50

100%

0.51

From Tables 3 and 4, we see that the loader spent much more
time waiting to put trees into the limbing carriage than the
limbing carriage spent waiting for trees. Therefore , the
processing activity , i.e. delimbing and bucking , determines
the production of the machine.
Average off-highway load volume was 62.4 m 3 (22 cunits).
Using this volume and the average processing time per truck
load from Table 4, potential productivity equals 57.2 m 3
per productive machine hour (PMH) (or 20 cunits per PMH).
Assuming the same level of machine utilization from Table 1 ,
potential productivity per 8-hr shift equals 386 m 3 . To
meet the required daily output (700 m 3 ) for the Peachland
yard , the Hahn would have to operate for 12.25 productive
machine hours each day. This would require 14.5 scheduled
hours or 2 working shifts.
Using the average total time per tree from Table 4 gives a
processing rate of 118 trees per PMH. From the potential
productivity of 57.2 m 3 per PMH a rate of 150 trees per PMH
is calculated. The apparent difference in rates (32 trees
per PMH) is explained by the trees which do not need processing. These logs are transferred by the Hahn's loader
from the full tree piles directly to the processed log
piles. For the study period, 22% of the trees arriving at
the yard required no further processing.
Comparing the potential productivity with the actual from
the shift level monitoring, the Hahn is achieving almost 76%
of its potential.

11

BUCKING QUALITY
Crown Zellerbach's bucking requirements for the yard at
Peachland are a 34 ft 8 in. log when possible , with top
diameter not less than 3.5 inches. If trees are less than
52 feet (i.e. small pine) , then the log is topped at 3
inches. Quality control also required long butting to
remove rot, root flare and damaged butts. Forked trees were
normally topped at the fork, except where the fork was low
enough to allow an extra log above it.
A sample of 90 logs was measured to determine the accuracy
of the bucking. Only those trees bucked to produce two logs
were used; those topped to remove forks were usually of
random lengths and were excluded. Table 5 shows the results.
TABLE 5.

Summary of Bucked Log Lengths.

Length

Tolerance

Number of Logs

% of Sample

34 ft 2 in.
34 ft 5 in.
34 ft 8 in.
34 ft 11 in.
35 ft 2 in.
over 35 ft 2 in.

-6 in.
-3 in.
0 in.
+3 in.
+6 in.
>+6 in.

0
1
5
3
22
59

—
1
6
3
24
66

90

100%

A tolerance limit of ±6 inches was used to compare bucking
accuracy with the company ’s allowance. None of the sample
logs was more than 3 inches short of the desired length.
Ten percent were within a tolerance of ±3 inches, and 34 percent were within a ±6 inch tolerance. The remaining 66 percent exceeded the +6 inch tolerance. The longest log measured 37 ft 8 in. , or 36 inches longer than the desired
length.
The Hahn was originally equipped with a roller device for
measuring log lengths. At Peachland, this had been replaced
with an electronic measuring device. Log lengths were more
accurate, but it is desirable to improve the accuracy further to reduce the amount of extra trim and improve load
volumes on the highway trucks. Assuming an average onhighway load of 100 trees , improving the bucking accuracy to
the desired length would give about 2% more usable volume
per truck load.

12

LIMBING QUALITY
Using the limbing quality standard described in Appendix II ,
the Hahn processed logs to class 1 standard. Figures C3 and
C4 show the limbing quality achieved , which was considered
excellent.

COMPARISON WITH OTHER HAHN TREE-LENGTH DELIMBERS IN B.C.
At the time of writing this report, there were 4 other Hahn
Tree-Length Delimbers working in B.C. Two of these have
been studied, one by the operating company and the other by
FERIC briefly as part of a different project. Results from
these 2 studies are compared with those for the machine at
Peachland and the comparisons are presented below.
The first machine has been operating since 1978 in the
southeast region of B.C., and for the most part in small
pine stands, heavily infested with mountain pine beetle. It
operated on landings with trees brought by skidders to the
machine. This Hahn was run by two operators, and there was
a front-end loader removing logs and debris. The user
company conducted a shift level study* and carried out detailed timing to determine the machine's actual and potential performance. Results from this study are presented
below.
Table 6 shows results from the shift level study with corresponding results for the Hahn at Peachland, taken from
Table 1. Both machines had operated for similar lengths of
time up to the dates of each study, which means that the
comparison is not between an older and a more recent model
of the Hahn.
The comparison shows that both machines are producing at
almost equal rates. Both had similar total productive machine hours in the period of the studies. At Peachland,
tree size was larger by one-third, but volumes produced do

*Murphy , D.G., 1979. Evaluation of a 'Hahn Harvester Full Tree DeLimb’ in the Flathead Valley of Southeastern British Columbia. Unpublished Thesis, School of Forestry, Lakehead University, Thunder
Bay, Ontario.

13

TABLE 6.

Comparison of Shift-Level Results.
Southeastern B.C.

Peachland

Days reported
Scheduled Machine Hours
Productive Machine Hours
Repair hours
Service hours
Non-mechanical delay hours

65
559
375
99
8
76

49
458
386.25
61.5
—
10.25

CPPA Machine availability
CPPA Machine utilization

78%
67%

87%
84%

Volume produced , m 3

15 260

16 410

Productivity, m 3 /PMH
Volume per tree , m 3

40.7
0.3

42.5
0.4

not reflect the same difference. The Hahn at Peachland was
processing fewer trees to achieve the volume, and obviously
had slower cycle times per tree. A major difference between
the 2 machines is shown by the repair hours and non-mechanical delay times, and therefore reflected in the different
machine availabilities and utilizations.
The second machine used in these comparisons was working on
Vancouver Island in small-sized old growth timber. The main
species were balsam fir and hemlock , with some yellow
cypress. The Hahn was operating in a sortyard, with full
trees coming off-highway to the yard. Full trees were unloaded onto skid logs adjacent to the Hahn by a D-8 push
Cat. Up to 4 off-highway loads could be placed on the skid
logs to supply the Hahn. The push Cat would have to move
the logs closer to the Hahn as processing continued (see
Figure E). This Hahn was run by one operator, who controlled both the loader and the delimber from the main cab.
Figure F shows this Hahn working at roadside on an earlier
logging show.
Three days of detailed timing of the processing activities
were made by FERIC in June 1981. The results are compared
with results from the other two machines and are presented
below in Table 7.

14

FIGURE E.

Push Cat moving full trees on skid
logs to the Hahn.

i
A

FIGURE F.

Hahn Tree-Length Delimber working
at roadside on Vancouver Island.

15

TABLE 7.

Comparison of Detailed Timing Results
for Processing Activities.

Peachland
Yard
(2 operators)

Vancouver Island
Yard
(1 operator)

Southeastern B.C.
Landing
(2 operators)

min/tree

%

min/tree

%

min/tree

%

Processing
Wait for tree
Delays (incl. move)

.40
.04
.07

79
7
14

.42
.17
.12

58
24
18

.31
.06
.10

65
14
21

Total Time

.51

100

.71

100

.47

100

No. of trees timed
Average tree size, m 3

1,511
.38

258
.49 (estimated)

1,228
.28

Potential Productivity
trees/PMH
m 3 /PMH

118
44.7

85
41.4

128
35.7

6

These results show that the two machines working in the
Interior of B.C. are similar in potential productivity based
on trees per PMH . The effect of tree size is clearly shown.
For the Hahn on Vancouver Island the effect of having only
one operator is shown by the high wait-for-tree time. This
represents the time spent operating the loader to grapple
and load a tree before processing can commence. The disadvantage of having only one man is more than offset by the
larger tree size. Tree size was estimated using an average
butt diameter for the sample of 32 cm and a tree height of
15.2 m. (No loads into the Vancouver Island yard were
scaled by weight or volume, as were the loads in the Interior.)
Using a second operator on the Hahn's loader increases potential productivity in trees per PMH by over 40% more than
that for only one operator.

COST ESTIMATES
The machine costs presented below show a realistic range of
costs that may be expected with the Hahn Tree-Length De limber , in view of the uncertainties entering into some of the
estimated values.
The total cost in dollars per m 3 for the Hahn is calculated
by the equation used in previous FERIC reports on machine
evaluations. Known cost values include:
Purchase price

: $200,000 f.o.b. Vancouver

Fuel & lubricants

: $10.00/PMH (incl. hydraulic
fluid)

Operator ’s wage

: $15.00/SMH (incl. fringe
benefits) per man

Depreciation period

: 4 years

Interest & insurance
factor

: 0.20

Estimated values (based on western Canadian conditions) include:

17

Favourable

Unfavourable

Residual value , $

20,000

20,000

Economic life of
machine , SMH

16,000

12,000

Utilization, %

80%

60%

Maintenance cost (100%
and 150% of fixed costs)
$/SMH

17.88

35.74

Productivity (based on
tree volumes of .5 m 3
and .3 m 3 ) - m 3 /PMH
- cunits/PMH

58.6
20.7

35.2
12.4

Using the above values in the cost equation gives the following results:
Favourable

Unfavourable

Total cost, $/PMH

92.20

159.28

Total cost, $/m 3
$/cunit

1.57
4.45

4.53
12.85

The calculations show that the Hahn can achieve acceptable
processing costs when it operates at a high level of utilization with favourable tree sizes.
Compared to manual delimbing and bucking or flail delimbing
with manual bucking, the Hahn provides safer working conditions, improved limbing quality and more accurate log
lengths (with their effect on hauling costs and mill recovery). Under favourable conditions, expected costs are
comparable to those for manual and flail de limbing--estimated to be in the range of $3.50 to $5.00.
Calculating an expected favourable cost for a Hahn with only
one operator , and the 40 percent reduction in productivity
as mentioned earlier , gives a total cost of $1.75 per m 3
($4.96 per cunit). This is again comparable to manual or

18

flail costs, and only slightly more expensive than for a 2man crew. In this set-up , the need for favourable operation
is very important.

DISCUSSION
The main objective behind introducing the Hahn Tree-Length
Delimber into the central processing yard at Peachland was a
reduction in loader time. FERIC ’s earlier study* of central
processing yard versus conventional logging reported that in
winter 2 Cat 966C front-end loaders handled a daily volume
of 820 m 3 , but in summer there were 3 loaders handling 575
m 3 through the yard. At that time, delimbing was done by
chain flails, with manual bucking and topping. The report
states:
"The portion of the loader activity attributed to
processing in the C.P.Y. System increased from 48%
in the winter to 59% in the summer. The per-volume
cost was double in the summer, however, because the
total number of hours was greater. This increase
was due to a reduced volume throughput and increased
debris handling."
Loader costs were given as $1.36 per m 3 in winter and $2.16
per m 3 in summer , and around 50% of these costs related to
the processing activities of the loaders.
By modifying the processing method to a mechanized system,
this phase of loader activity would be greatly reduced.
During the study of the Hahn, there were 2 front-end loaders working in the yard. These 2 machines performed all the
necessary functions to maintain the daily volume processed
in the yard. As the Hahn was not processing the total volume of 700 m 3 , flail delimbing and manual bucking still
occurred. One of the loaders spent time spreading loads
for this and decking the processed logs, in addition to the
unloading of off-highway trucks and loading of highway
trucks.

*Hedin, I.B., 1980. Comparison of Two Logging Systems in Interior
British Columbia: Central Processing Yard vs Conventional. Forest
Engineering Research Institute of Canada (FERIC) Technical Report
No. TR-45.

19

To date, the company feels that it has succeeded in reducing
loader time by introducing a Hahn. In changing from flail
delimbing, they feel that the quality of chips produced from
trim material at the mill has improved. The quality of log
entering the mill has improved through better delimbing
quality and more accurate log lengths. They also feel that
it is now a safer operation, with the workers in the machine
cabs.
Since the study, the logging contractor has purchased a second Hahn Tree-Length Delimber. It commenced work in June.
The 2 units are able to process the required daily volume.
The crew on the second machine is still gaining experience
and production should increase to the same level as the
first unit.
The machine studied showed an acceptable level of availability and utilization. Its production increased over the
period of shift-level monitoring showing an increase in
operator proficiency as experience increased. The level
reached at the end of monitoring represented a very acceptable volume under the prevailing conditions. The ability to
process more than one tree at a time for the smaller tree
sizes was demonstrated. The machine does show the normal
sensitivity to tree size. For effective delimbing and
bucking of small trees, development of a multi-stem processor is needed.

20

CONCLUSIONS
Introducing a Hahn Tree-Length De limber into its central
processing yard at Peachland allowed the user company to
achieve its objective of reduced loader time , and therefore
a reduction in loader costs. The machine displayed a high
level of machine availability (87%) and utilization (84%).
Production averaged 5.7 off-highway truck loads per day (342
m 3 ) , and showed an increase throughout the study up to 7
loads per day (420 m 3 ). During the study, 22% of the trees
arriving at the yard did not require limbing and bucking by
the Hahn. In order to process the yard 's daily volume ,
either a second shift was necessary or the addition of a
second unit. The latter has occurred and the daily volume
is now mechanically processed. Secondary benefits of improved log quality and worker safety have also been realized.
The number of Hahn Tree-Length Delimbers in use in B.C. has
grown, and its ability to handle small size coastal timber
as well as Interior wood has been demonstrated.

21

APPENDIX I:

MANUFACTURER'S SPECIFICATIONS

MAX. LOADER SWIHG
330*
TOOL COMPARTMENT
(4) STABILIZERS
FOLDING ARM TVPE
tr-9" STANCE AT GROUND LEVEL

MAX. LOADER GROUND REACH

9'-0” STANCE AT 10" LIFT

M'-B"
MAX. LOADER GROUND REACH

HYDRAULIC OIL
RESERVOIR (CAP. 100 GAL.)
FUEL TANK (CAP. 69 GAL.)

MAX. LOADER GROUW REACH
24'0' BOOM

CHAIN SAW

DE-LIMB CARRIAGE TRAVEL 35 -6"
SPEED: VARIABLE 0-600 FPM
SPROCKETS C TO C
MIN: 43'・2%" MAX. 43'・8%"

OPERATOR CA8 AND
HYDRAULK VALVE COMPARTMENT

' HYDRAULIC LOADER

ENGINE COMPARTMENT

iri〇"

HOLD DOWN ARMS
KICK Oin ARM

DE-LIMB CARRIAGy

PLANETARY DRIVE AXLE

SCALE: = 1'
DATE: 1-25-77

ZI
-10" STABILIZER !
LIFT
( LOADER

.lldP" WHEELBASE________I ________
17'-8’
_

_

J CHAIN SAW

45' TOTAL LENGTH

SPECIFICATIONS
Weight: 44,500 lbs.
Height: 12’-5"

STANDARD ACCESSORIES

BRAKES

BASIC MACHINE
Width: 1〇'-ָ "
Length: 45'-0"

ENGINE
GM 4-71 Diesel, 160 hp at 2,100 rpm

TIRES
17.5 x 25 Traction Tread

AXLES
Drive: Franklin, n o - s p i n planetary,
hydraulically propelled
Steering: Hydraulically actuated

Hydraulic operated chain saw
Light package group
’Fixed heel on loader
Low oil level warning system
Anti-slab arm

Drive line m o u n t e d hydraulic disc caliper
with brake lock for park.
Power assist disc brakes on drive wheels.

OPTIONS

OPERATOR CAB
Fully insulated with heater/defroster

Additional control station tor loader operator
Electronic log length measuring system

LOADER
Hahn 793. external gear turn-table bearing,
hydraulic motor swing.
Lift capacity: 15,200 lbs. @ 5 feet,
3,300 lbs. @ 20 feet.
Electro-Hydraulic joy stick controls.
Continuous rotate grapple.

The Hahn patented
d e l i m b carriage ensures
positive d e l i m b i n g down
to four-inch diameter.

DELIMB
17,000 lbs. force @ 600 feet per minute

CARRIAGE DRIVE
Hydro Static

In keeping with Hahn Machinery's policy of continuous product improvement,
all specifications are subject to change without prior notice.

Manufactured by

HAHN MACHINERY, INC.

23

APPENDIX II
LIMBING QUALITY GUIDE

In order to assess the quality of delimbing full trees mechanically or manually , some standards are needed. A visual
assessment of quality offers the best potential for fast
effective examination. Some differentiation by classes is
necessary, in order for effective comparisons between machines and methods. The four classes given below are derived from an earlier PAPRICAN study* which evaluated a delimbing machine which processed a whole skidder turn at one
pass. Their use in appraising the quality of delimbing is
recommended by FERIC , and will be used in future studies of
delimbers.
Description of Quality of Limbing Classes 1 to 4
Quality of Limbing
Class

Description

1

No branches and branch stubs left on
trees or logs.

2

A few branches and branch stubs left on
trees or logs but no additional manual
limbing is necessary.

3

About 50% of the trees or logs have some
branches remaining. Additional manual
limbing may be necessary.

4

Nearly all the trees or logs have some
branches remaining. Bushy appearance.
Additional manual limbing definitely
necessary.

Heidersdorf , E., 1973. Evaluation of New Logging Machines: Morard
Delimber. Pulp & Paper Research Institute of Canada, Logging
Research Report LRR 52.

24

