FOREST ENGINEERING
RESEARCH INSTITUTE
OF CANADA

INSTITUT CANADIEN
DE RECHERCHES
EN GENIE FORESTIER

P A R T I A L C U T T I N G IN M O U N T A I N O U S
O L D - G R O W T H F O R E S T S IN
C O A S T A L BRITISH C O L U M B I A :
H A R V E S T I N G P R O D U C T I V I T Y A N D COST,
AND RESIDUAL STAND IMPACTS
D.M. B e n n e t t
December 1997

PARTIAL CUTTING IN MOUNTAINOUS OLD-GROWTH
FORESTS IN COASTAL BRITISH COLUMBIA:
HARVESTING PRODUCTIVITY AND COST, AND
RESIDUAL STAND IMPACTS

D.M. Bennett
Forest Engineering Research Institute of Canada

FERIC Technical Report No. TR-119
December 1997

KEYWORDS:

Partial cutting systems, Harvesting, Felling, Manual method, Cable logging systems, Old-growth forests.
Mountainous terrain. Steep slopes. Productivity, Costs, Residual stand impacts. Coastal British Columbia.

© Copyright 1997, Forest Engineering Research Institute of Canada ISSN 0381-7733

Abstract
The Forest Engineering Research Institute of Canada ( F E R I C ) and Intemational Forest Products Limited developed
and implemented a partial cutting trial at Chamiss Bay on the west coast of Vancouver Island in British Columbia.
The 1995/96 study investigated the harvesting feasibiUty for partial cutting in old-growth stands on steep slopes.
The productivity and cost results for engineering, tiee marking, manual falling, and cable yarding provide important
new information to help forest operators plan, budget, and implement partial cutting trials and operations.

Author
Doug Bennett obtained B.S.F. and M.Sc. degrees in Forest Operations from the Faculty of Forestry at the University of
British Columbia. Beginning in 1979, he was employed by Tahsis Co. Ltd., and other companies that preceded
Pacific Forest Products Limited, on the west coast of Vancouver Island. He held positions in forest engineering and
road constmction supervision. In late 1987, Doug joined F E R I C as a Senior Researcher in the Harvest Engineering
Group. His project work has focused on forest road constmction and maintenance, and altemative harvesting systems.
Doug is a Registered Professional Forester (R.P.F.) and a registered Professional Engineer (P.Eng.) in British Columbia.

Acknowledgments
F E R I C employees Marv Clark and Ray Krag advised the author, helped initiate the trial, and reviewed draft

reports;
Brian Boswell, Peter Dyson, and Gord Nienaber helped with the field work; Monique Kalmokoff produced the graphics
in this report and Shelley Corradiru prepared the report for printing. The author is grateful for their assistance. The
project was the basis for the author's M.Sc. thesis, and F E R I C ' s support of his graduate studies work is sincerely
appreciated. Professors John Nelson, Glen Young, Andrew Howard, Gordon Weetman, Peter Marshall, and Joe
McNeel, of U B C ' s Faculty of Forestry, provided valuable advice and review of study plans and draft reports.
Many Intemational Forest Products employees helped plan and carry out the trial, including: B i l l Gilpin and Doug
McMillan, General Manager of Coast Forest Operations and Chamiss Bay Woods Foreman, respectively, during the
project period; Chris Nuim, Area Silviculturist in the company' s West Coast Operations; and the yarding and loading
crews at Chamiss Bay. The cooperation and skill of the falling contractor, Donny Shiels, was also instmmental in
successfully implementing the harvest plan.
Funding assistance for the harvesting study was provided by the British Columbia Ministry of Forests (BCMOF)
Silvicultural Systems Program, and the Forest Practices component of the Canadian Forest Service Green Plan. Brian
D'Anjou of the B C M O F Vancouver Forest Sciences Section also provided advice during the plaiming stage.

Disclaimer
This report is pubUshed solely to disseminate information to F E R I C members and partners. It is not intended as an
endorsement or approval by F E R I C of any product or service to the exclusion of others that may be suitable.

Table of Contents
Abstract
Author
Acknowledgements
Disclaimer
Summary
Sommaire

iii
iii
iii
iii
vii
vii

INTRODUCTION

1

BACKGROUND

1

STUDY METHODS
Study Sites
Cutting Treatments
Harvesting Productivities and Costs

2
2
3
3

DESCRIPTION OF OPERATIONS
Engineering
Tree Marking
Falling and Bucking
Yarding and Loading

4
4
4
5
6

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Engineering
Tree Marking
Falling and Bucking
Yarding and Loading
Residual Stand Damage
Soil Surface Conditions
Other Observations

7
7
8
10
11
13
14
14

CONCLUSIONS

17

REFERENCES

18

APPENDIX I
Hourly Equipment Costs for Cable-Yarding Systems

19
19

APPENDIX n
Hourly Falling and Bucking Cost

20
20

V

List of Tables
Table 1.
Table 2.
Table 3.
Table 4.
Table 5.
Table 6.
Table 7.
Table 8.
Table 9.
Table 10.
Table 11.

Stand Conditions by Cutting Unit
Field W o r k Required for Retention Units
Post-Harvest Stand Descriptions for Retention Units
Average Falling and Bucking Productivity by Cutting Unit
Average Falling and B u c k i n g Cost by Cutting U n i t
Average Cable Yarding Production: Summary
Average Cable Yarding Productivity by Cutting U n i t
Average Yarding and Loading Cost by Cutting Unit
Damage to Residual Trees i n tihe 65% Retention U n i t
Damage to Residual Trees in the 70% Retention U n i t
Post-Harvest Soil Surface Conditions i n the 65 % and 70% Retention Units

3
8
9
10
11
11
12
13
14
14
15

List of Figures
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.
Figure 8.
Figure 9.
Figure 10.
Figure 11.
Figure 12.
Figure 13.

Location of the study sites.
Layout of four of the five cutting treatments.
Layout of the 65% retention unit.
Faller wedging a tree i n the 65% retention unit.
Cypress 7280B swing yarder.
M S P (dropline) carriage used with the swing yarder.
Yarding corridor i n the 65% retention unit immediately
prior to yarding—tailhold stump in foreground.
Yarding corridor i n the 65% retention unit after yarding
was completed—ground level view, looking up the slope.
Pre- and post-harvest diameter distributions for the 65% retention unit.
Pre- and post-harvest diameter distributions for the 70% retention unit.
Time distribution for cable yarding operations.
65% retention unit following harvest.
55 and 70% retention units during harvest (oblique angle).

1
2
2
6
6
6
8
8
9
9
11
15
16

Summary
The Forest Engineering Research Institute of Canada ( F E R I C ) and Intemational Forest Products Limited (Interfor)
developed and implemented a partial cutting trial at Chamiss Bay on the west coast of Vancouver Island. The smdy
was conducted to investigate the harvesting feasibility of partijd cutting in old-growth stands on steep slopes. The
study sites were located within the Very Wet Maritime subzone (Submontane variant) of the Coastal Westem Hemlock
biogeoclimatic zone (CWHvml).
Harvesting, using manual falling and cable-yarding systems, was done in the summers of 1995 and 1996. Two partial
cuts (referred to £is retention uiuts), two strip cuts, and one clearcut were included in the harvesting study. The retention
units had high levels of tree retention, 65 and 70% by basal area, with uniform dispersal of the retained trees.
Harvesting productivities and costs were derived from shift-level production reports. Post-harvest surveys were
conducted to quantify residual stand damage and soil-distiu-bance levels in the retention units.
In the 65% retention imit, falling productivity was 31% lower and falling cost was 45% higher than in the clearcut.
However, falling productivity was reduced by only 2% in the 70% retention unit, compared to the clearcut, mainly
because of a marked difference in timber type between this urut and the clearcut.
Cable-yarding productivity, measured in volume of logs per productive machine hoiu", was 34 and 30% lower in the
65 and 70% retention units, respectively, than in the clearcut. Yarding costs, based on scheduled machine hoiu-s,
were 46 and 32% higher in these same units. These are the relative differences in yarding productivity and cost for
the Chamiss Bay trial where a clearcut in similar steep terrain, with no landings, was used for comparison.
Post-harvest surveys showed that 34 and 37% of the residual stems had at least one scar of any size, and 12 and 10% of the
residual stems had at least one scar that was >900 cm^, in the 65 and 70% retention uiuts, respectively. Exposed
mineral soil was observed on only 1.4 and 1.5% of the soil surface area in the 65 and 70% retention units, respectively.
The productivity and cost results for the retention units provide important new information to help forest operators plan,
budget, and implement fumre partial-cutting trials and operations. The trial showed the potential to harvest timber
on sensitive sites, with conventional equipment and crews, thus creating an opportunity to augment timber supplies.

Sommaire
L'Institut canadien de recherches en genie forestier (FERIC) et Intemational Forest Products Limited (Interfor) ont
prepare et mis en oeuvre un essai de coupe partielle a Chamiss Bay sur la cote ouest de I'ile de Vancouver. L'etude
avait pour but d'examiner la faisabilite de recolter par coupe partielle de vieux peuplements primitifs sur de fortes
pentes. Les aires d'etude etaient situees dans la sous-zone maritime tres humide (variante submontagnarde) de la
zone biogeoclimatique de la pmche de I'Ouest cotiere (CWHvml).
L a recolte a ete effectuee par abattage manuel et telepherage durant les etes 1995 et 1996. Les aires d'etude
comprenaient deux coupes partielles (designees comme unites de coupes avec reserves), deux coupes par bandes et
une coupe rase. Dans les uiutes de coupe avec reserves, on conservait une proportion elevee des arbres, soit 65 et 70 %
en surface terriere, avec dispersion uniforme. Les productivites et les couts de recolte ont ete derives des rapports
de production par poste de travail. Des inventaires apres coupe ont permis de quantifier les niveaux de dommages
au peuplement residuel et de perturbation du sol dans les unites avec reserves.
Dans I'unite avec 65 % de reserves, la productivite a I'abattage etait de 31 % plus faible et le coiit de I'abattage y
etait de 45 % plus eleve que dans la coupe rase. Cependant, la productivite a 1' abattage etait reduite de 2 % seulement
dans I'unite avec 70 % de reserves, comparativement a la coupe rase, principalement a cause d'une difference marquee
dans le type de peuplement entre ces deux unites.
L a productivite du telepherage, mesuree en volume de billes par heure-machine productive, etait de 34 et de 30 %
plus faible dans les unites avec 65 et 70 % de reserves, respectivement, que dans la coupe rase. Le coiit du telepherage,
base sur le nombre d'heures-machines prevues, etait de 46 et de 32 % plus eleve dans ces memes unites. Ce sont les

differences relatives dans la productivite et le cout du telepherage pour l'essai de Chamiss Bay oii une coupe rase
dans un terrain escarpe similaire, sans jetees, a ete utilisee aux fins de comparaison.
Les inventaires apres coupe ont montre que 34 et 37 % des tiges residuelles avaient au moins une blessiue de dimensions
quelconques, et que 12 et 10 % des tiges residuelles avaient au moins une blessiu-e de 900 cm^, dans les unites avec
65 et 70 % de reserves, respectivement. Une exposition du sol mineral a ete observee sur seulement 1,4 et 1,5 % de
la surface du sol dans les unites avec 65 et 70 % de reserves, respectivement.
Les resultats relatifs a la productivite et au cout dans les unites de coupe avec reserves representent une nouvelle
information importante susceptible d'aider dorenavant les operateiu-s forestiers a planifier, a budgeter et a executer
des essais et des operations de coupe partielle. L'essai a demontre la possibilite de recolter des arbres sur des sites
fragiles, avec de I'equipement traditionnel et des equipes manuelles, offrant ainsi I'occasion d'augmenter les
approvisionnements de matiere ligneuse.

INTRODUCTION
Several studies have examined cable yarding operations
for commercial thinning and partial cutting prescriptions
in second-grovvth forests (Kellogg et al. 1996; Kellogg
et al. 1986; Tesch et al. 1986; Howard et al. 1996; Hedin
1994). Others have assessed the opportunity to apply
altemative silviculmral systems to mature forests in
coastal British Columbia (Nelson et al. 1990; Weetman
et al. 1990; Moore 1991; Sanders and Wilford 1986).
However, there are few well-documented operational
trials of partial cut harvesting using cable systems in
mountainous old-growth forests of coastal British
Columbia. Therefore the harvesting feasibility—in
terms of harvesting productivity and cost, and impacts
on residual stands and soils—of such operations is not
well understood.
In particular, no operational trials have been performed
in the Very Wet Maritime subzone (Submontane variant)
of the Coastal Westem Hemlock biogeocHmatic zone
(CWHvml). This biogeoclimatic unit is very common
along westem Vancouver Island and the outer mainland
coast of British Coliunbia, and forms a critical component
of the timber supply in these regions.
This report describes the results of a cable harvesting
trial involving the use of high-retention silvicultural
systems on steep, environmentally sensitive slopes
on the west coast of Vancouver Island. Harvesting
operations were conducted between July 1995 and
September 1996 at International Forest Products
L i m i t e d ' s (Interfor) Chamiss B a y operation i n
Kyuquot Sound.

and other coastal forest companies began a series of
meetings to discuss the feasibility of an operational
trial. A trial of altemative harvesting systems was
proposed by the group, and Interfor's operating area
at Chamiss Bay in Kyuquot Sound was chosen as the
location (Figure 1). The committee recognized that
implementing altemative silviculmral systems in oldgrowth stands on steep, sensitive coastal sites would
be a challenge for harvest planners and practioners,
especially if high levels ofti-eeretention were required.
However, an investigation into partial cutting under
these conditions was needed because such sites are
often permanently deferred from conventional clearcut
harvesting (Sauder and Wellbum 1989). A successful
demonstration of silvicultural systems that maintain
high levels of tree retention might permit similar
harvesting methods to be employed on previously
deferred environmentally sensitive sites and thereby
augment the coastal timber supply. More recently, the
need for operational harvesting trials was recognized
by the Clayoquot Sound Scientific Panel (CSP 1995).
The steering committee felt strongly that it was essential
to involve forest workers from the outset to ensiu-e that
they gained direct experience with altemative harvesting
practices. It was also important to determine whether
' Shelterwood Forest Management Ltd., Courtenay, B.C.

BACKGROUND
In early 1992, Interfor was asked by local citizens and
the Kyuquot/Checleset First Nations to explore
alternatives to clearcutting in the Kyuquot Sound area
on the west coast of Vancouver Island. Traditional
clearcutting and plantation silviculture are proven,
well-established practices for regenerating the
forested ecosystems within Kyuquot Sound. However,
the need to reduce the visual impact of harvesting,
maintain the stability of steep slopes, and preserve the
quality of water on sensitive sites were the primary
reasons for the request.
Subsequently, a steering committee composed of
representatives of Interfor, the Forest Engineering
Research Institute of Canada (FERIC), the University of
British Columbia (UBC) Faculty of Forestry, a forest
resources consultant,' the B.C. Ministry of Forests
(BCMOF) Vancouver Region's Forest Sciences Section,

Figure 1. Location of tiie study sites.

conventional cable-yarding equipment currently
used in coastal B . C could be successfully applied to
partial cutting in old-growth stands. If so, investment
in new alternative yarding equipment could be
minimized.
FERIC and Interfor worked together to plan and
implement the trial, and designed a study to determine
the feasibility of the harvesting operations. The study
had the following objectives:
• Develop and implement procedures for the
engineering and tree-marking phases, and
document the methods and costs for these phases.
• Detennine harvesting productivities and costs for
the partial cutting units in the trial, and compare
them to a clearcut in similar terrain and stand
conditions.

Cutblock
A - 5 5 % Retention
B - 7 0 % Retention
C - Clearcut
D - Strip clearcuts

—

• Determine the levels of residual stand damage and
soil dismrbance associated with harvesting in the
partial cutting units.

Figure 2.

Yarding corridors
Roads

Layout of four of thefivecutting treatments.

• Provide preliminary comment on the short-term
effects of the partial cutting methods on visual
quality and windthrow.

STUDY METHODS
Study Sites
Two areas considered typical of the sites that were the
focus of this trial were selected for harvesting. One area
was a uniform sidehill interrupted by occasional gully
complexes; this site was subdivided into four cutting
units (A,B,C, and D) (Figure 2) with similar terrain
conditions and aspects. Unit boundaries were located
around stands of timber situated between the steep
gullies; the sizes of the cutting units were dictated by
gully spacings. The second site, consisting of one
cutting unit (E), was located in a neighbouring valley
(Figure 3). This cutting unit had the steepest terrain,
with slopes on some portions exceeding 100%. The
areas and average ground slopes for all cutting units are
found in Table 1. Elevations ranged from 300-600 m
above sea level, and ground slope varied from 55-1 (X)%.
The stands represented old-growth forests on zonal sites
within the C W H v m l biogeoclimatic unit. The
predominant tree species were westem hemlock (Tsuga
heterophylla) and amabilis fir (Abies amabilis) with a
minor component of westem red cedar (Thuja plicata)
(Table 1). The shmb layer was comprised mainly of
huckleberry and blueberry (Vaccinium spp.).

Cutblock E - 6 5 % Retention
—

— Yarding corridors
Roads

Figure 3.

Layout of the 65% retention unit.

Like many areas on the west coast of Vancouver Island,
the trial sites are subject to storm-force winds in winter
The high potential for windthrow influenced the choice
of tree retention levels in the Chamiss Bay trial. A
windthrow hazard assessment was conducted to provide
baseline information about stand level characteristics
(Mitchell 1993). Topographic exposure, rooting depth,
and exposure to winds were used in conjunction with
observed windthrow patterns to assess the relative
windthrow risk in the cutting units.

Table 1.

Stand Conditions by Cutting Unit

55%
retention ^

65%
retention

70%
retention

Stiip cuts

Clearcut

Area (ha)

1.7

5.1

2.4

2.8

2.3

Average ground slope (%)

65

81

61

58

62

Species composition
Westem hemlock (%)
Amabilis fir (%)
Westem red cedar (%)
Otiier species (%)

55
6

m5

71
24
4
1

65
16
14
5

56
6
33
5

72
26
2
0

Tree density (no./ha)

441

494

435

437

503

Basal area (m^/ha)

62

76

84

64

75

Net volume (m^/ha)

616

821

893

638

809

Cutting unit description

'
^

This cutting unit is not included in the productivity and cost analysis.
Two strip cuts, 1.4-ha each, were harvested.

Cutting Treatments

Harvesting Productivities and Costs

Five cutting treatments were selected for the trial, and
one treatment was assigned to each cutting unit. High
levels of tree retention were prescribed for three cutting
units and two variations of clearcutting were prescribed
for the other two imits. The following basal area retention
targets for live trees were set for the partial cutting
units, hereafter referred to as "retention units":

Engineering and tree marking. The cutting units were
designed around existing roads. Standard forest
engineering procedures were used to locate and
traverse the external boundaries of the cutting units and
were not included as part of this trial. Only the
incremental time—i.e., the time spent on corridor layout
and tree marking was used in the calculation of
engineering and marking costs.

• 55% retention.
• 65% retention.
• 70% retention.
The otiier treatments were:
• One small clearcut.
• Two strip cuts, each 50-60 m in width.
Four of the five cutting treatments (the 55 and 70%
retention units, the small clearcut, and the strip cuts)
were situated on one hillside (Figure 2), and the 65%
retention treatment was assigned to the other site.
Although three retention units were harvested in the
Chamiss Bay trial, only the 65 and 70% units were
included in the harvesting study. The 55% retention unit
was located in a poor timber type and had only a small
volume harvested from it. This unit provided Interfor
with an opportunity to gain additional operational
experience with partial cutting, but it was not a suitable
source of data for the harvesting smdy.

Falling, yarding, and loading. Productivities and costs for
the falling and cable-yarding phases were determined for
the 65 and 70% retention imits, the strip cuts, and clearcut.
Shift reports, detailing time and production, were conq)leted
daily by the falling and cable-yarding crews and collected
for the shifts worked in each cutting unit—i.e., 100%
of the shifts were sampled. These shift-level records
formed the basis for the productivity and cost analyses.
The total volume yarded (m^) from each cutting unit
was tracked and scaled at the Chamiss Bay sortyard.
Hourly owning and operating costs were developed
using FERIC's standard costing methodology for examples
of typical cable-yarding and log-loading equipment
used in the study and for an individual faller (Appendix
1 and 11) and applied to the productivity measures to
generate unit harvesting costs for each phase. Costs for
log loading were summarized together with the yarding
phase because operating conditions in the steep terrain
required the yarder and log loader to work as a team.

Residual stand damage and soil surface conditions.
Surveys were conducted to quantify the level of
damage to residual trees and changes to soil surface
conditions resulting from harvesting in the 65 and
70% retention units. The sampling scheme was based
on the principles of cluster sampling (Cochran 1977),
combined with systematic selection of the clusters. A
randomly oriented grid with grid points spaced on a
35-m by 35-m pattern was superimposed over the
site maps, providing 34 and 17 evenly distributed
plot centers for the 65 and 70% retention units,
respectively.
Each grid point served as the center of a circular fixedarea plot, with a radius of 11.28 m and area of 0.04 ha,
to document residual stand damage. The species and
diameter of all trees in each plot were recorded. For
trees with scarred boles, the diameter, width, and length
of individual scars; scarring severity; and location of
each scar were recorded.
The grid points were also used as plot centers for
assessing soil siuface conditions. At each grid point two
17-m transects were estabUshed with dieir origins at the
grid point. The first transect was mn on a random
bearing and the second transect was mn on an offset
bearing 90° clockwise from the first transect.
Cluster sampling, using clusters of equal sizes, was
applied to record soil conditions. The lengths occupied
by each class of soil surface condition, along each
transect, were recorded and then summed for both
transects at each grid point. The proportion of total
transect length (based on the combined 34-m length of
both transects) was calculated for each class of soil
surface condition at each grid point.

DESCRIPTION O F OPERATIONS
Engineering
Prior to beginning the layout phase, the following
harvest design specifications were developed to guide
engineering activities:
• A l l cutting units were designed for uphill yarding.
• Yarding corridors were to be 4 m wide and spaced
approximately 30 m apart.
• Parallel yarding corridors, oriented perpendicular to
the contours, were preferred.
• Partial suspension of logs was required diuing lateral
yarding and uphill yarding along the corridors.

• The yarder's running lines were to be confined within
the yarding corridor at an elevation of 10-15 m
above the ground.
• Backspar trees were to be used wherever possible to
achieve desired line clearances and partial suspension.
Field layout was performed in a series of steps. First,
cutting unit boundaries were located, surveyed, and
mapped at a scale of 1:2000. Second, potential backspar
trees or tailhold stumps, and suitable tieback trees or
stumps, were located; next, preferred yarder positions
on the road were identified. These points were then
connected in a closed tiaverse and mapped. Third, a
centerline for each yarding corridor was located to
match the preferred yarder position on the road with
the selected backspar tree or stump that most closely
met cable-deflection requirements and the desired
spacing between corridors. Finally, deflection lines
were surveyed and load path analyses were conducted
for each corridor. Required rigging heights for the
backspar trees were determined fi-om these analyses.
The longest slope yarding distance and longest distance
to a tailhold were 320 and 380 m, respectively. These
distances were required for some yarding corridors in
the 65% retention unit.
Input from Interfor's woods foreman, the falling
contractor, and the Worker's Compensation Board of
British Columbia (WCB) was obtained in the field and
incorporated into the design and engineering of cuttmg
treatments and the ttee-marking criteria.

Tree l\/larking
Five goals were specified for the post-harvest condition
of the stands:
1. Maintain a continuous forest cover, and evaluate
the need to plant any gaps, such as yarding
corridors, after harvesting.
2. Retain a high proportion of relatively uniformly
distributed residual trees to prevent windthrow.
3. Retain approximately the same proportion of tree
species and diameter classes in the residual stands
as in the natural untreated stands.
4. Retain some of the forest stmctures, such as large
trees and downed wood, for biological diversity.
5 .Give priority to removing trees with hemlock
dwarf mistletoe (Arceuthobium tsugense) or other
diseases to improve forest health.

These goals guided tree-marking in the retention units.
Tree retention and removal targets were expressed in
terms of live tree basal area (m^/ha). Total basal area
in each retention unit was reduced by marking trees for
cutting in all diameter classes such that the proportion
of trees in each diameter class after harvesting was
similar to that class's proportion in the original stand—
i.e., trees were marked across the stand profile so that
a similar diameter distribution was retained.
Wherever possible, trees that appeared vigorous and
well-formed were left to continue to grow. Trees given
priority for cutting were:

assisted the markers, thus providing a good opportunity
to review the practical aspects of tree selection
methodology.
Trees were marked to cut in the following sequence:
(1) two adjacent 4-m-wide yarding corridors were
delineated by marking all trees within 2 m either side
of the corridor centerline; and (2) the segment of the
stand in between the two corridors was then marked.
Because corridor centerlines had been previously plotted,
individual areas for these stand segments were easily
calculated on the 1:2000 scale maps. The areas were
used to compute unit basal area as each segment of the
stand was marked.

• A l l snags, to comply with W C B safety regulations.
• Westem hemlock infected with hemlock dwarf
mistletoe, and all species displaying conk or other
pathological indicators.
• Trees displaying poor form, and those thought to
be dying.
• Trees judged to be susceptible to windthrow, based
on criteria in Stathers et al. (1994).
Inter-tree distance, crown width, and canopy closure
were also considered during marking, but rigid criteria
were not practical given the irregular stracture of the
old-growth stands. A tree spacing of 5 m was occasionally
used as a general mle when marking in dense clumps
of trees.
Falling feasibility, taking into account the adjacent
residual trees and surrounding terrain, was a crucial
factor in marking. Usually several trees were evaluated
simultaneously because cutting one tree often meant
that others had to be taken to prevent hang-ups and
bmshing of residuals during falling.
Species, diameter-at-breast-height (dbh), and
pathological indicators were recorded for all marked
live trees in each retention unit to control the marking
process. Also, species, dbh, and estimated height were
recorded for all snags. Tree data were entered into a
datalogger in the field as tree marking progressed, and
were downloaded and analyzed at the end of the day
to ensure that the basal area retention targets were
being met.
Marking was done with a three-person team: two
people measured diameters and marked the selected
trees with paint, and one person entered data in the data
logger. Forest engineering and forestry personnel
collaborated in the tree-marking phase. Occasionally
the operation's woods foreman and lead contract faller

In the early stages of marking, ribbon was used to flag
the selected trees and data were analyzed as each stand
segment was completed. Tree marking with paint did
not begin until markers were confident that the basal
area targets for a cutting unit could be met. The
retention units were under-marked by 3 to 5% of
basal area to allow for additional tree removals during
the falling phase for safety reasons, and to recover any
stems damaged during falling or yarding.
Although all snags within the cutting units were feUed for
safety reasons, abundant snags remained in the "leave"
areas and forested gullies adjacent to the trial's
small cutting units. These snags, and the high numbers
of trees within the retention units themselves, meant
that much of the natural forest's structural diversity
was retained in the vicinity of the retention units.

Falling and Bucking
One contractor^ was responsible for manual falling and
bucking in all units. Except in the 65% retention unit,
only one faller could work in each cutting unit because
of their small sizes. However, the cutting units (except
the 65% retention unit) were on a common hillside and
close enough to each other that fallers could monitor
one another as they worked in neighbouring units,
thereby satisfying W C B requirements.
The fallers used a chainsaw, an axe, and wedges to fall
and buck trees in the retention units. Practices were the
same as for conventional falling in clearcuts. Fallers
worked up the slope progressing back and forth over a
section of the stand, using the tree's natural lean to fall
each tree across the slope, and trees were wedged over
when necessary (Figure 4). The limbs were removed
and the stems were bucked to Interfor's preferred
lengths.

^ Shiels Falling and Consulting Ltd., Nanaimo, B . C .

Figure 4. Faller wedging a tree in the 65% retention
unit.
A l l trees within the yarding corridors were felled
concurrently with the rest of the marked trees in the
stand. Corridor trees were felled in the same maimer
as other marked trees, across the slope, and bucked
where they rested. Directional felling of timber toward
yarding corridors in a herringbone pattern was not
attempted because of the large tree sizes and steep
slopes. The fallers were directed to use their discretion
and substitute marked trees with similar unmarked
trees if they felt uncomfortable about a faUing situation.

Figure 5.

Cypress 7280B swing yarder.

Figure 6.

MSP (dropline) carriage used with the
swing yarder.

Yarding and Loading
Interfor's crews used company-owned equipment for
the yarding and loading phases. A Cypress 7280B
swing yarder (Figure 5) rigged in a running skyline
configtu-ation harvested the tiiree retention units and the
clearcut. A Johnson mechanical slackpulling (MSP)
carriage was used to provide the necessary lateral
yarding capability (Figure 6). The yarder worked on
single-lane roads in the retention units and clearcut, and
swoing logs onto the road surface for unhooking.
The swing yarder, weighing 72 700 kg, is typical of the
large yarders that are used extensively on the B.C. coast
for harvesting clearcuts in old-growth timber The winch
for the 7280B model is comprised of two side-by-side
main drums (connected by a geared counter-rotating
assembly), and a haulback drum. It is mechanically
interlocked in both directions and, in this case, was
retrofitted with water-cooled regenerative clutches.
A system of yarding corridors was used in the retention
units. Logs were pulled laterally into each skyline
corridor and then yarded up the corridor to roadside.
For each yarding corridor, the designated backspar tiee
was rigged at the height needed to achieve the required
deflection in the running lines and ground clearance.

The four longest corridors in the 65% retention unit (see
Figure 3) were rigged to stamps in a cutover across a
gully, which provided the required deflection and
running line clearance for yarding. Backspar trees were
also used in the clearcut. The clearcut provided a good
comparison to the retention units, in terms of yarding
operations, because the swing yarder was again
equipped with the M S P carriage, and the terrain and
landing conditions were similar.
A M a d i l l 171 tower yarder, rigged in a slackline
configuration and equipped with an M S P carriage,
was used to harvest the two strip clearcuts. The
deflection lines run during the engineering phase had
shown that timber in the lower portions of each strip

could not be yarded by high-lead or running skyline
systems. Good deflection was assured in each strip
cut by anchoring the skyline on a ridge located 600
m slope distance below the yarder. The tower yarder
worked on large landings above each strip cut making
it easy to land logs and unhook chokers in front of
the machine.

speed under which the yarding crews could safely work
in the partially cut stands.

The droplines used with the two M S P carriages were
45 m long and 22 mm in diameter, while chokers were
7.5 m long and 19 mm in diameter.

Nine and five yarding corridors were laid out to
harvest the 65 and 70% retention units, respectively
(see Figures 2 and 3). The time and costs for corridor
layout in the 65 and 70% retention units are shown in
Table 2. Incremental engineering activities included in
corridor layout are: locating and mapping backspars,
tailholds, tie-backs, and yarder positions; locating and
flagging corridor centerlines; miming deflection lines;
and conducting load path analyses for each corridor.
Person-hours represent the combined time for all
members of the engineering crew. One-third of the
total hours spent on corridor layout was charged at
$56.25/h while two-thirds were charged at $31.25/h.
This apportionment represents a crew of one field
engineer/forester and two assistants. Costs were
$2.57/m' and $2.66/m3 for the 65 and 70% retention
units, respectively.

Hydraulic log loaders were paired with the swing yarder
and tower yarder in all the cutting units.
The yarding crew complement for the retention units
was slightly different than for the strip cuts and clearcut.
A rigging slinger^ and one chokersetter hooked chokers
in the retention units, while two chokersetters worked
with the rigging slinger in the strip cuts and clearcut.
Most of the time two chokers were attached to the
dropline in the retention units; three chokers were used
in the strip cuts and clearcut.
In the retention units, the hooktender, swing yarder
operator, and rigging slinger communicated with
hand-held radios. The rigging slinger directed the
yarder operator where to stop the carriage for log
hookup; the rigging crew then pulled the dropline and
chokers laterally to the logs. After the chokers were set
and the crew was at a safe distance from the yarding
lines, the rigging slinger directed the operator to yard
the logs laterally into the corridor.
The ability of swing yarders to operate within the width
of a single-lane road is important when cable yarding
on steep slopes because road widths must be kept to a
minimum and opportunities to build landings are
limited in this type of terrain. A swing yarder can move
easily along such roads between parallel yarding
corridors, and rig-up involves setting only two guylines.
The running skyline configuration used for these
yarders, combined with an M S P carriage, is a flexible
system suitable for clearcuts or partial cuts (Lysons and
Twito 1973; Mann 1977). A l s o , log handling is
facilitated in steep terrain if the yarder can swing and
land logs on the road for unhooking or pass them to an
accompanying log loader as the logs reach roadside.
These factors led to the choice of a swing yarder for
the retention units in the Chamiss Bay trial.
The region's W C B Occupational Safety Officer^ visited
the sites on several occasions prior to and during
engineering, falling, and cable yarding operations.
Additional safe work procedures were developed for
the trial, including guidelines for the maximum wind

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Engineering

A n accurate cutting unit base map is imperative for
yarding corridor layout. Roads, cutting boundaries,
backspar locations, and yarder positions must be
carefully surveyed. Because the corridors were narrow
(4 m) and distances to the tailhold extended up to 380 m,
the flagged line connecting the yarder's positions with
the backspars had to be perfectly straight to ensure that
after falling, the yarder's lines would ran without
obstraction to the backspar. If bearings are not accurate,
several attempts may be needed to connect corridor end
points. The mapping scale of 1:2000 was found to be
appropriate for this purpose. Key points could be
plotted accurately, which in turn enabled correct bearings
to be calculated for yarding corridor centerlines.
The 4-m wide corridors used in this trial worked well.
The narrow corridors were specified to reduce the
visual impact of harvesting and to prevent wind from
penetrating the stand. Figure 7 shows a corridor in the
65% retention unit, viewed after falling but prior to
yarding. The tailhold stump in the foreground was one
of four located on a slope across the creek from the
cutting tmit. Figure 8 shows a post-harvest view looking
up the slope from within the corridor.

' A "rigging slinger" supervises the chokersetters, chooses the
logs for hookup, and participates in choker setting.
* John Galuska, Occupational Safety Officer, Worker's Compensation Board of British Columbia, Courtenay, B . C .

Table 2.

Field Work Required for Retention Units

Corridor layout
Tree marking
Total

person-h

65% retention
S/m"

$/ha

person-h

70% retention
$/m^

$/ha

117
91
208

2.57
2.00
4.57

908
706
1 614

60
32
92

2.66
1.42
4.08

990
528
1 517

A relatively close corridor spacing of 30 m was chosen
because the steep terrain and large trees raised a concem
that logs would tend to roll downhill during lateral
yarding and hang up behind residual trees. In most cases
this spacing was achieved. In practice, a rigid
specification for corridor spacing carmot be maintained
on sites like those at Chamiss Bay. In a few cases the
distance was increased up to 40 m when rock bluffs
interfered with the desired corridor location or the
preferred backspar trees were widely spaced.

Figure 7.

Yarding corridor in the 65% retention unit
immediately prior to yarding—tailhold
stump in foreground.
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

The trial showed that the target height above ground
of 10-15 m for the mnning lines was correct. This
provided enough clearance between the ground and the
mniung lines to yard logs laterally and move them into
the corridor without damaging the trees bordering the
corridor Too much clearance would allow the lines to
lift out of the corridor and damage tree tops. During
lateral yarding, the mnning lines would often lightiy
contact some tiees bordering the corridor. Logs turned
easily from thek lateral cross-slope position into the
corridor when the specified height of the mnning
lines was maintained. Adhering to the engineering
specifications for miming Une height is important when

I^^^^^^^^H^^^^^^^^B

yarding
Parallel corridors, oriented perpendicular to the
contours, were preferred to provide control of logs and
to reduce hang-ups during yarding. A parallel corridor
configuration was laid out on the 65% retention unit
but ridges and gullies, and the orientation of the haul
road and unit boundaries, dictated corridors in a
fan-shape—i.e., several corridors radiating from one
yarder position—in the other retention units. The
number of fan-shaped corridors emanating from one
landing was kept to two or three to minimize the amount
of cross-slope yarding within the corridors. In fact,
corridors in the fan-shaped configuration still ran
roughly perpendicular to tiie contour because landings
were positioned on ridges. Such positions enabled the
yarder to bring logs directiy uphill on either side of a ridge.

Figure 8.

Yarding corridor in the 65% retention unit
after yarding was completed—ground level
view, looking up the slope.

Downhill yarding was not considered for the Chamiss
Bay trial because of the steep slopes and high cutbanks
along the roads. The safety of the yarder operator and
landing crew may be jeopardized when yarding downhill
through a steep corridor if the yarder is positioned at tiie

corridor's base, in the path of potential runaway logs
and debris. Downhill yarding in partied cuts may be an
option if the harvesting system is designed appropriately,
for example, the yarder is positioned beyond the base
of the slope, or yarding is restricted to gentle slopes.

• Douglu fir
• WMtamradcsdar
• AmabJIa fir

Tree Marking
The marking procedures developed for the Chamiss Bay
trial worked well operationally. On-site input from the
falling contractor and the woods foreman was especially
useful because by the time engineering and tree
marking were completed, these individuals were assiu-ed

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

110

120

^130

DBH clan (cm)

• Douglaa fir

Table 3.

Post-Harvest
Stand Descriptions
Retention Units
65%
retention

Species composition
Westem hemlock (%)
Amabilis fir (%)
Westem red cedar (%)
Otiier species (%)

for

• Amabiliafir

70%
retention
20

i'
1

m
17
n2

Tree density (no./ha)

381

302

Basal area (m^/ha)

49

57

Net volume (m^/ha)

518

632

71

• Wsstsmradcadar
• Arabila fir

so

70

ao

00

100

110

120

ai30

DBH clua(cm}

Post-Harvsst

• WMtwn r»d cedar
• AmabJIia fir
• W f l B U m bamlocfc

50

60

70

80

so

100

110

120

^ 130

DBH cl>M(cm)

Figure 9.

• Waotam redcedar

Preand post-harvest
diameter
distributions for the 65% retention unit.

30

40

50

60

70

80

go

100

110

120

2130

DBH c l a u (cm)

Figure 10. Pre- and post-harvest diameter distributions
for the 70% retention unit.
that the harvest plan was workable and they were
determined to make it succeed. Evidence of the success
of the marking scheme is that the fallers substituted very
few marked trees with altemate unmarked trees.
Table 3 shows the post-harvest stand descriptions,
and Figures 9 and 10 show the pre- and post-harvest
diameter distributions for the 65 and 70% retention
units, respectively. The retained trees were dispersed
as uniformly as possible in each unit, although the
pattem of retention was variable because the spatial
distribution of trees in the untreated stands was irregular
with numerous gaps.
Tree marking costs were $2.00/m5 ($706/ha) and
$ 1 .Allm' ($528/ha) for the 65 and 70% retention units,
respectively (Table 2). The higher cost in the 65%
retention unit is attributed to two factors. First, this unit
had the longest yarding distances and the steepest, most
mgged terrain, so a greater proportion of hiking time
was required to complete the marking. Second, the
tree-marking procedures were first used and refined in
this unit, so the experience gained here reduced the
marking time required for the 70% retention unit.
Tree marking in old-growth is complex and unfamiliar
to most foresters on the B . C . coast. It is difficult to
balance all the tree marking criteria because a forester
must weigh many objectives simultaneously and make
tradeoffs during the process. The marking system must
be coordinated with the natural lean of the trees to make

the falling operation safe and to minimize damage to
the residual stand. Perhaps most importantiy, markers
must try to visualize the sequence and direction in
which each tree will be felled. This means being able
to gauge a tree's lean even when it is not obvious,
something that is often difficult to do in such forests.
The marker is not likely to have this skill and input from
an experienced faller is invaluable at this stage. When
marking has been done correctly, fallers should be able
to fall trees, successively, into natural gaps in the stand,
and into the openings created when snags and other
marked trees have been felled. In the end, the fallers must
have the option to exchange marked trees with similar
urunarked trees for safety reasons.

and the clearcut provide the best comparison of the
relative difference in faUing productivity under the trial
conditions (i.e., 31 % lower falling productivity for the
retention unit compared to the clearcut) because
species composition and volumes per ha were very
similar in these units. The falling productivity in the
70% retention unit (27.5 m^/h or 178.8 mVshift) was
relatively high, only 1.6% lower than the falling
productivity in the clearcut. This was attributed mainly
to the tall, uruform timber and the high net volume per
hectare in the 70% retention uiut (Table 1).
The substantial difference in productivity between the
two retention units probably resulted from a combination
of factors. First, the terrain was steeper and yarding
distances were longer in the 65% retention urut and
therefore the proportion of faller's time needed to pack
equipment into the uiut, and to hike in and out of the
work area each day, was greater. Second, although
average dbh of the marked stems was greater in the 65%
retention unit, the trees appeared to be shorter and more
limby compared to the tall, uniform timber and the
higher volume per ha in 70% retention unit.

The trial's planners marked each tree for cutting, with
input from the fallers, because the novel silvicultiu-e
prescriptions, developed for the structiu-ally complex
old-growth stands, were untried. Tree marking forces
planners to thoroughly review and implement their
harvesting proposals on the ground. For several
reasons, this is a prudent step when plarming partial
cuts in challenging stand and tertain conditions. First,
it ensures that planners deal with the practical aspects
of tree selection and falling. Second, the marking
process promotes a better understanding of long-term
stand management goals. A n d finally, when advice
from operations persoimel is drawn into the process,
the possibility of an unworkable harvest plan being
forced on an operation should be eliminated. A n
acceptable altemative, for subsequent operations in
similar stands, is to have experienced fallers select the
trees as they carry out their faUing and bucking activities.

The lower falling productivity in the strip cuts
compared to the clearcut reflects in part the fact that
when a working area is confined to a 50- to 60-m-wide
strip, the faller must spend more time directing trees
into the strip along each side boundary. Timber type was
another factor Even though the clearcut and strip cuts
were in close proximity on the same hillside, the strip
cuts were in a relatively low-volume cedar-hemlock
stand and the clearcut was in a higher voliune hemlockamabiUs fir stand.

Falling and Bucking

The costs per cubic metre for falling and bucking are
shown in Table 5. Even for the retention units, these
are quite low compared to most conventional falling
operations in coastal B.C. because allowances for crew
transportation, overhead, and profit were not included
in the calculation of hourly falling cost, and falling

Table 4 presents four productivity measures for falling
and bucking by cutting unit. Compared to the trial's small
clearcut, falling productivities were 31% lower in the
65% retention uiut, 2% lower in the 70% retention unit,
and 18% lower in the strip cuts. The 65% retention unit
Table 4.

Average Falling and Bucking Productivity by Cutting Unit

Productivity

"

65% retention

70% retention

Strip cuts

Clearcut

Pieces"
no./shift''
no./h

63.8
9.8

112.4
17.3

95.7
14.7

109.8
16.9

Volume
mVshift
m^/h

125.1
19.2

178.8
27.5

149.3
23.0

181.7
28.0

A "piece" is a manufactured log, ready for yarding.
A faller's shift length is 6.3 h.

10

Table 5.

Average Falling and Bucking Cost by Cutting Unit"

Activity

65% retention

70% retention

Strip cuts

Clearcut

3.82

2.67

3.20

2.63

Falling and bucking ($/m^)
"

These costs are quite low compared to most conventional falhng operations in coastal B . C . because allowances for crew transportation,
overhead, and profit were not included in the calculation of hourly falling cost, and falling productivities in the trial units were quite high.
The cost results should therefore be used primarily to examine the relative differences in falling costs between the trial imits themselves.

productivities in the trial units were quite high. The
results should therefore be used p r i m a r i l y for
examining the relative differences in falling costs
between the trial units themselves. Compared to the
trial's small clearcut, falling costs were 45% higher in
the 65% retention unit, 2% higher in the 70% retention,
and 22% higher in the strip cuts.

activities during the study period including delays (with
the exception of long-term mechanical delays), and
includes productive yarding time plus mechanical and
non-mechanical delays. Productive machine hours
(PMH) includes ordy actual productive yarding time and
the time required to change yarding roads or corridors.
Figure 11 shows the distribution of total S M H for
cable yarding in each cutting unit. The yarding logs
component accounted for 78% of the total S M H in the
65% retention unit, 83% in the 70% retention, 70% in
the strip cuts, and 77% in the clearcut. In the strip cuts,
the time available for yarding logs was lower because
13% of S M H was taken up with other delays (failures
of guyline stumps and a skyline anchor stump).

Also, because Interfor's preferred log lengths were
maintained in all cutting units, there were no negative
impacts on log value associated with the retention units.
Partial cutting prescriptions add to the complexities of
falUng old-growth timber, and the fallers' paramount
concem was maintaining safe work practices. A l l snags
were felled concurrently with marked green trees.
(There were 35 and 55 snags/ha in the 65 and 70%
retention units, respectively.) Potential problems such
as hang-ups, brushing of standing timber during
falling, and limbs hanging up in the residual canopy
were infrequent. Falling and bucking operations were
completed without any safety incidents. The fact that
high productivities were also achieved in all cutting
units is evidence of the skill and hard work that the
falling contractor brought to bear on this project.

• other delays
• Repeir r L r n t n g
lines
• Rig-up/dBmartle

g

B Change yarding
corridors
• Yarding logs

65%
retentkin

Yarding and Loading

*

cuts

Cutting unit

Figure 11. Time distribution
operations.

Table 6 smnmarizes cable-yarding production. Scheduled
machine hours (SMH) represent the time spent on all
Table 6.

70%
retention

for cable

yarding

Average Cable Yarding Production: Summary

Production

65% retention

70% retention

Strip cuts

Clearcut

Total time
PMH"
SMH''

109.7
125.4

51.0
56.0

99.5
128.8

82.8
98.5

Yarding production
Volume (m^)
Volume (mVpiece)
Pieces (no./cycle)

1799
1.1
2.3

894
0.8
2.4

1791
0-9
2.6

2 069
0.8
2.7

P M H = productive machine hours.
S M H = scheduled machine hours.

Yarding road changes accounted for 9% of S M H in the
65% retention unit, 8% in 70% retention, 7% in strip
cuts, and 7% in the clearcut. For the retention units,
each yarding corridor required a yarding road change;
in the strip cuts, two skyUne yarding road changes were
reqiured in each strip. The retention units required more
road changes per unit volume of timber logged, but the
average time per road change was longest in the strip
cuts because the skyline anchor and the tower yarder
were both repositioned.

On the basis of S M H , yarding productivity ranged from
a low of 13.9 mVSMH in the strip cuts to a high of
21.0 mVSMH in tiie small clearcut. The 65 and 70%
retention uiuts had yarding productivities of 14.3 and
16.0 mVSMH, respectively. The lower production per
S M H in the strip cuts compared to the retention units
was due to the guyline and skyline anchor stump
failures that occurred in the strips.
Table 8 presents costs for the yarding and loading
operations, calculated by dividing hourly costs by
m V S M H . Total costs for the yarding phase were
$26.86/m^ for tiie 65% retention unit, $24.12 for tiie
70% retention, $24.00 for tiie stiip cuts and $18.34 for
the clearcut. Compared to the clearcut, therefore, yarding
costs were 46% higher in the 65% retention unit,
32% higher in the 70% retention, and 31% higher in
the strip cuts.

Rig-up/dismantle, the time required for the iiutial setup
and subsequent dismantiing of the cable yarder in each
cutting unit, accounted for 4% of S M H in the 65%
retention unit, 6% in 70% retention, 7% in the strip cuts,
and 8% in the clearcut. There was one occurrence in
each retention unit and the clearcut, and two occurrences
in the strip cuts, i.e., one for each strip.
The major category within mechanical delays was
repair running lines, which included downtime
associated with broken wire rope and subsequent
splicing of the yarder's operating lines. The largest
proportion of S M H for line repairs, at 8%, was recorded
in the 65% retention unit. On several occasions the
haulback' line broke at the point where it was secured
to the drum. This occurred only at the start of the
project, in the first and the longest corridors yarded, and
the problem was eventually rectified.

The costs for log loading depended on the productivity
of the yarding machines because the yarders and log
loaders have to work side-by-side in the steep terrain.
Total loading costs were therefore $11.77/m^ for the
65% retention unit, $10.57 for the 70% retention,
$12.12 for the strip cuts and $8.03 for the clearcut.
The study sites provided an opportunity to compare
yarding productivity and costs in the retention imits and
the clearcut for the same yarding system, under
similar terrain and landing conditions. However, the
reader is reminded that this study was conducted in
difficult terrain. Thus the yarding phase cost for the

Table 7 shows productivity results fortiiecable-yarding
phase by cutting unit. On the basis of m^/PMH (excluding
mechanical and non-mechanical delays), yarding
productivities relative to the trial's clearcut were 34%
lower in the 65% retention unit, 30% lower in the 70%
retention, and 28% lower in the strip cuts.

Table 7.

' The "haulback" is the yarder's line that is used to outhaul the
carriage, butt rigging, or grapple.

Average Cable Yarding Productivity by Cutting Unit

Productivity^''

65% retention

70% retention

Cycles
no./PMH
no./SMH

6.8
6.1

7.5
6.8

Pieces
no./PMH
no./SMH

15.6
13.7

18.2
16.6

18.0
14.2

21.6
19.0

Volume
m^/PMH
mVSMH

16.4
14.3

17.5
16.0

18.0
13.9

25.0
21.0

'

P M H = productive machine hours.
S M H = scheduled machine hours.

12

Strip cuts

Clearcut
7.7
6.7

Table 8.

Average Yarding and Loading Cost by Cutting Unit
65% retention

70% retention

Strip cuts

Clearcut

Yarding
Equipment ($/m^)
Labour (S/m^)
Subtotal ($/m3)

15.78
11.08
26.86

14.17
9.95
24.12

10.60
13.40
24.00

10.77
7.57
18.34

Loading
Equipment ($/m^)
Labour "($/m^)
Subtotal ($/m3)

6.95
4.82
11.77

6.24
4.33
10.57

7.16
4.96
12.12

4.74
3.29
8.03

Total ($/m3)

38.63

34.69

36.12

26.37

Includes cost of full-time landing bucker.

clearcut in this trial is higher than the average yarding
phase cost for most coastal forest operations.

log does not follow the anticipated path. The yarder's
interlock mechanism facilitated positive carriage
control and positioning.

The supervisory personnel and harvesting crews
responded positively to the new challenge of yarding
in the retention units. Initially, two chokersetters
accompanied the rigging slinger, and up to fotu" chokers
were used in the 65% retention unit. This was the first
retention unit to be yarded and crews were anxious to
show traditional productivity levels under the new
system. However, this arrangement was quickly
abandoned when damage to residual trees occurred. A
more controlled approach was then adopted using a
rigging slinger and one chokersetter with two chokers,
and steady production was achieved.

Residual Stand Damage
Tables 9 and 10 summarize residual stand damage levels
for the 65 and 70% retention units, respectively, in terms
of trees/ha and proportion of residual stems (%)
with scarring of tree boles. Damage from the falUng and
yarding phases is combined in the tables. Two levels
of damage are shown: (1) all scarred trees regardless
of scar size; (2) scarred trees having individual scars of
900 cm^ or greater. (When scars exceed this threshold
size, 60 to 85% of scars on westem hemlock and tme
firs usually become infected by disease (Nevill, in press).)

A l s o , some pre-setting of chokers* was initially
attempted, again to maximize production. However,
this practice too was quickly abandoned because, in the
steep terrain, there was the risk of logs mnning away
from the yarder or loader working on the road above.
After setting the chokers, the crew would walk well
beyond one side of the corridor, ensuring that they were
not below the yarder or loader, and remain there until
the carriage returned for the next cycle of log hookup.
Yarding and loading operations were completed
without any safety incidents.

The proportion of trees with scars of any size was sunilar
for the two retention units. In the 65% retention unit,
88 trees/ha (34% of residual trees) were scarred and
damage was evenly distributed over westem hemlock
and amabilis frr. In the 70% retention unit, 147 ti-ees/ha
(37%) were scarred and damage was concentrated on
the westem hemlock. With approximately one-third of
the trees in each tmit exhibiting at least one scar of any
size, there is room for some improvement in damage
levels as crews gain more experience with partial cutting.

Rigging the yarding corridors and positioning the M S P
carriage during each yarding cycle required additional
skill and concentration on the part of the rigging crew
in order to remove the logs without damaging the
residual trees. The rigging slinger has a key role in this
type of yarding operation. This worker must anticipate
the path that the logs will take as they begin to move
from their position on the slope. Patience is required
to position the carriage accurately for lateral yarding,
and time must be taken to reposition the carriage if a

The proportion of residual trees with scars >900 cm^
was similar for the two retention units (31 trees/ha and
12% intiie65% retention unit, and 38ti-ees/haand 10%
in the 70% retention tmit). This is considered a good result
given the steep slopes and large timber of these units.
The practice of "pre-setting" chokers requires two sets of
chokers for the yarding operation; while logs are being yarded
to the landing with one set, the crew works to hookup logs for
the next yarding cycle with the second set.

13

Table 9.

Damage to Residual Trees in the 65% Retention Unit"

Damage

Westem hemlock

Amabilis fir

Total

43 (5)
18(3)

45(4)
13(2)

88 (7)
31(3)

16.5 (2.0)
7.0(1.1)

17.0(1.8)
4.7 (1.0)

33.5 (3.0)
11.7(1.6)

Residual trees
W i t h scars of any size (no./ha)
W i t h scars > 900 cm^ (no./ha)
Proportion of residual trees
W i t h scars of any size (%)
W i t h scars > 900 cm^ (%)

Means for the variables of interest are presented; standard errors are shown in parentheses.

Table 10. Damage to Residual Trees in the 70% Retention Unit"
Westem
red cedar

Other
species

Total

12(5)
4(3)

31(8)
7(4)

1(1)
1(1)

147 (17)
38 (6)

3.0(1.4)
1.1 (0.7)

7.8 (2.1)
1.9 (0.9)

0.4 (0.3)
0.4 (0.3)

37.3 (4.8)
9.7(1.7)

Westem
hemlock

Amabilis

Residual trees
W i t h scars of any size (no./ha)
W i t h scars > 900 cm^ (no./ha)

103(16)
25 (5)

Proportion of residual trees
W i t h scars o f any size (%)
W i t h scars > 900 cm^ (%)

26.1 (4.3)
6.3(1.5)

Damage

Means for the variables of interest are presented; standard errors are shown in parentheses.

and 70% retention units, respectively. Exposed mineral
soil was observed on only 1.4 and 1.5% of the surface
area in these same units.

Diuing the yarding operations it was observed that the
incidence of scarring increased when the yarder's running
lines were too low. This was apparent in two corridors in
the 70% retention unit when the haulback block was not
hung at the optimal height in the backspar tiee. Low
mnning lines made maneuvering logs into the corridor
more difficult, resulting in more damage to residuals.

Soil disturbance was observed only within the yarding
corridors, and there, only in discontinuous patches.
Yarding did not create linear gouges or channels in the
yarding corridors. Because logs were partially suspended,
the trailing ends of the logs often bounced and touched
the ground at intermittent points as they were yarded
uphill along a corridor In fact, full suspension of logs
was achieved along many segments of the corridors and
the soil surface was not disturbed in these areas.

On rare occasions, severely damaged corridor trees were
felled and yarded to roadside after cable yarding
operations had been completed on a particular corridor

Soil Surface Conditions
Table 11 summarizes soil surface conditions following
harvesting for the 65% and 70% retention units.
Three classes of soil surface condition were identified:
(1) forest floor displacement (exposed mineral soil),
(2) mixed organic material and mineral soil, and
(3) undisturbed soil. The undisturbed category dominated
both units and accounted for 89.8 and 95.9% of the
soil surface area in the 65 and 70% retention units,
respectively. Mixed organic material and mineral soil
(scuffing and mixing of soil surface layers where
partially suspended logs were dragged over the soil)
accounted for 8.8 and 2.6% of surface area in the 65

Overdl, the impact of the harvesting operations on the
soil appears to be minor It is not likely tiiat post-harvest
soil surface conditions have increased the risks for mass
wasting or surface erosion. The levels of forest floor
displacement are well below the Umits specified for
sensitive sites in B.C.'s Forest Practices Code Soil
Conservation Guidebook ( B C M O F 1995a).

Other Observations
Changes to landscape visual conditions. To assess
whether high-retention partial cutting with cable
14

Table 11. Post-Harvest Soil Surface Conditions in the 65% and 70% Retention Units

Proportion of cutting unit area affected'
65% retention unit
70% retention unit
(%)
(%)

Soil conditions
Forest floor displacement (exposed mineral soil)

1.4

(0.6)

1.5

(1.0)

Mixed organic material and mineral soil

8.8

(2.1)

2.6

(1.3)

Undisturbed soil

89.8

(2.2)

95.9

(1.5)

'

Means for the variables of interest are presented; standard errors are shown in parentheses.

systems has the potential to meet stringent Visual Quality
Objectives (VQO) in visually sensitive areas, photographs were taken of the cutting units and surrounding
landscape before and after harvesting, from aircraft,
along forest roads within the operation, and from an
inlet to the east of the operation. (Refer to B.C.'s Forest
Practices Code Visual Impact Assessment Guidebook
( B C M O F 1995b) for V Q O definitions.)
Figures 12 and 13 show the trial uruts from an aerial
viewpoint. Note that aerial views accentuate alterations
to the landscape, and that conventional visual impact
assessments are usually done from a terrestrial
viewpoint. It is difficuh to detect any harvesting activity
in the retention units in these photographs. The yarding
corridors were visible from the air immediately after

65% retention
(yardiitg completec^.

oundary

Figure 12. 65% retention unit following harvest.

yarding was completed, but only in direct overhead
light conditions. The corridors were not visible at
oblique lighting angles due to dense shadows. One year
later, during another flight over the sites, the ground
cover in these same corridors had blended into the
landscape, making the corridors more difficult to
discern.
The narrow corridors in the retention units and the high
levels of tree retention undoubtedly contributed to the
minimal visual impact of the operations. The crowns
of many trees adjacent to the 4-m-wide corridors
overhung portions of the corridors, thus shielding them
from view. Further, the irregular stmcture of typical
coastal old-growth stands gives a "ragged" appearance
compared to a uniform second-growth stand, which

Figure 13. 55 and 70% retention units during harvest (oblique angle).
most susceptible to windthrow—i.e., trees with defects
and trees that appeared to be rooted on unstable
substrates—were removed in the harvest. Finally, the
retained trees represented the full natural stand profile
and included both dominants and emergents. Mitchell
(1993) noted that although the issue of leave tree
selection is contentious, several studies have suggested
that retaining both dominants and emergents improves
the windfirmness of residual stands.

further helps lessen the negative visual effects of
harvesting operations (USDA Forest Service 1978).
These results provide needed information about the
visual inpact of high-retention partial cutting in old-growth
on steep slopes within the C W H v m l biogeoclimatic
uiut. Whether a cutting treatment will meet a particular
V Q O is open to interpretation. However, it would
appear that the retention units in the trial met a Partial
Retention VQO—i.e., activities are visible but remain
subordinate—when viewed from aircraft. If a terrestrial
viewpoint was used, these units may satisfy a Retention
VQO—i.e., activities are not visually evident.

It must be stressed that these observations are only
preliminary. M o r e time must elapse before the
long-term windfirmness of these retention treatments
can be evaluated.

Windfirmness of the residual stands. Like many
areas on the west coast of Vancouver Island, the
Kyuquot Sound region is subject to frequent storm-force
winds in winter months. Particularly severe storms hit
the area during the winter of 1995/96 and caused many
windthrow and mass wasting events in the region's
natural forests. However, no windthrow occurred in the
retention cutting units at Chamiss Bay, suggesting that
the windthrow management sttategies adopted for these
units may be appropriate and efTective, at least in the
short term, for several reasons. First, the high retention
levels chosen for the trial and the relatively uniform
distribution of the retained trees maintained sufficient
crown cover to prevent wind from penetrating the
residual stands. Second, trees that were considered

Planning and implementing partial cutting. Partial
cutting is best planned in conjunction with clearcut
operations in the same vicinity to make supervision and
coordination of equipment between areas more
efficient. In some areas, it may be possible to incorporate
partial cuts into development plans without adding to
road-development costs. This is because large areas of
developed timber have already accumulated in coastal
regions but are cmrently deferred from harvesting for
environmental and other reasons. Also, forest operators
are adding to the bank of deferred timber because they
are building new roads through long sections of sensitive
terrain to gain access to areas suitable for clearcutting.
These sensitive areas are candidates for partial cutting.
16

The trial showed the potential to operate on such sites
with conventional equipment and crews, thus creating
an opportunity to augment timber supplies.

was reduced by only 2% compared to the clearcut,
mainly because of a marked difference in timber type
between this unit and the trial's clearcut. Cable yarding
productivity in this unit was 30% lower than in the
clearcut, and yarding costs (based on SMH) were 32%
higher. It must be stressed that these are the relative
differences in falling and yarding productivity and cost
for the Chamiss Bay trial in which a clearcut in similar
steep terrain, with no landings, was used for comparison.
The steep slopes and narrow roads meant that the yarder
could not deck logs along the roads, so a log loader had
to work beside the yarder in all the cutting units. The
cable-yarding phase cost for the clearcut in this trial is
higher than the average cable-yarding phase cost for
most coastal forest operations.

Also important are the intangible benefits that can
flow from a high-retention partial cutting trial. For
example, planners and operations personnel gain the
skills and confidence needed to address other less
difficult harvesting situations. They can apply the
techniques to areas that need low or moderate levels
of tree retention, where the trees are either dispersed
or i n clumps, and to riparian zones with special
prescriptions. Also, silviculturists can now think
about altemative silviculmre prescriptions on sites
where partial cutting was considered operationally
unworkable. However, there is still much to learn
about stand and regeneration responses to these cutting
methods on the type of sites described in this trial.
Treated stands need to be monitored over the long-term
to generate the stand dynamics information that will
strengthen fumre prescriptions.

Post-harvest surveys showed that 34 and 37% of the
residual trees had at least one scar of any size, and 12
and 10% of the residual trees had at least one scar that
was 900 cm^ or greater in the 65 and 70% retention
units, respectively. Exposed mineral soil was observed
on only 1.4 and 1.5% of the soil surface area in the 65
and 70% retention units, respectively.

CONCLUSIONS

A strategy for falling timber in high-retention systems
must be carefully prepared. In this trial the fallers were
included from the beginning in the planning and
tree-marking processes. When operations commenced
they were familiar with the objectives of the trial. They
felt assured that a workable plan was in place and were
determined to follow the marking scheme productively
and safely.

This study investigated the harvesting feasibility of
partial cutting in old-growth stands on the steep
sensitive slopes of coastal British Columbia where
clearcutting is restricted for environmental and/or
visual quality reasons. The trial demonstrated that
British Columbia forest workers have the skills needed
to successfully implement high-retention partial-cutting
systems in challenging terrain and timber conditions,
and that industry-standard swing yarders are very
effective in such operations. The productivity and cost
results for the retention units provide important new
information to help forest operators plan, budget, and
implement futiu'e partial cutting trials and operations.

The trial showed that a modem interlock swing yarder
equipped with a mechanical slackpulling ( M S P )
carriage is well-suited to uphill yarding in partial cuts
on steep slopes. This type of machine can be moved
between yarding corridors and rigged-up quickly, and
its abiUty to swing and land logs on the road is essential.
The M S P carriage is needed to provide a lateral
yarding capability.

Implementing high-retention partial cutting under these
conditions requires close cooperation between foresters,
forest engineers, harvesting supervisors, and loggers.
A l l groups must contribute and coordinate their efforts
if the stand management objectives are to be met. Safe
work procedures must be reviewed and, when necessary,
new procedures developed to suit the working
conditions of the operation. Cooperation was achieved
in the trial, and the fallers and yarding crews adapted
well and worked hard to make the project a success.

Although the benefits of swing yarders and mnning
skyline systems have been proven for over two decades,
traditionally these systems have been narrowly applied
in B.C. where they are usuidly configured for grapple
yarding. As this trial shows, these yarding cranes are
technologically advanced machines capable of addressing
a wide range of harvesting challenges on sensitive sites.
Fitting swing yarders with M S P carriages, using them
over extended yarding distances, and applying them to
partial cutting prescriptions is an alternative for
harvesting sensitive sites. By adapting existing yarding
cranes to such applications, the B.C. forest industry can
avoid large investments in new yarding equipment to
address sensitive site harvesting needs.

In the 65% retention unit, falling productivity was 31 %
lower, and cable yarding productivity (expressed in
m^/PMH) was 34% lower than in the clearcut. Falling
costs therefore increased by 45% relative to the clearcut,
while yarding costs (based on SMH) increased by 46%.
In the 70% retention unit, however, falling productivity
17

Moore, K . 1991. Partial cutting and helicopter yarding
on environmentally sensitive floodplains in oldgrowth hemlock/spmce forests. Research Branch,
B . C . Ministry of Forestry, Victoria, B C . F R D A
Report 166. 43 pp.

REFERENCES
British Columbia Ministry of Forests (BCMOF); B C
Envu-onment. 1995a. Soil conservation guidebook
(Forest Practices Code of British Columbia). 17 pp.

Cochran, W.G. 1977. Sampling techniques. 3rd ed.
John Wiley & Sons. 428 pp.

Nelson, J.; Daust, D . ; Finn, S. 1990. A review of
silvicultural systems and harvesting altematives for
old-growth forests of coastal British Columbia.
University of British Columbia, Faculty of Forestry,
Vancouver, B . C . Contract report for MacMillan
Bloedel Limited, Woodlands Services, Nanaimo,
B C . 57 pp.

CSP Scientific Panel for Sustainable Forest Practices
in Clayoquot Sound. 1995. Sustainable ecosystem
management in Clayoquot Sound. Planning and
practices. Secretariat, Cortex Consultants Inc.,
Victoria, B C . 296 pp.

Nevill, R.J. (in press). A literature review on tree
wounding and partial-cut harvesting. Contract
report for the B r i t i s h C o l u m b i a M i n i s t r y of
Forests, Prince Rupert Forest Region, Smithers,
B C . 69 pp.

Hedin, L B . 1994. Shelterwood harvesting in coastal
second-growth Douglas-fir. F E R I C , Vancouver, B C .
Technical Note TN-216. 10 pp.

Sanders, P R . W . ; Wilford, D . J . 1986. Silvicultural
altematives for the management of unstable sites in
the Queen Charlotte Islands: a literature review and
recommendations. British Columbia Ministry of
Forests, Information Services Branch, Victoria,
B.C. Land Management Report 42. 42 pp.

British Columbia Mmistry of Forests (BCMOF); B C
Environment. 1995b. Visual impact assessment
guidebook (Forest Practices Code of British
Columbia). 25 pp.

Howard, A.F.; Rutherford, D . ; Young, G . G . 1996.
Optimal skyline corridor spacing for partial cutting
in second-growth stands of coastal British Columbia.
Canadian Journal of Forestry Research 26
(3):368-375.

Sauder, E.A; Wellbum, G.V. 1989. Planning logging:
two case studies on the Qaeen Charlotte Islands.
British Columbia Ministry of Forests and Lands.
Land Mjuiagement Report No. 59.47 pp.

Kellogg, L.D.; Bettmger, P ; Edwards, R . M . 1996. A
comparison of logging planning, felling, and
skyline yarding costs between clearcutting and five
group-selection harvesting methods. Western
Journal of Applied Forestiy ll(3):90-96.

Stathers, R.J.; Rollerson, T.R; Mitchell, S.J. 1994.
Windthrow handbook for British Columbia forests.
British Columbia Miiustry of Forests, Victoria, B C .
Research Program Working Paper 9401. 31 pp.

Kellogg, L . D . ; Olsen, E.D.; Hargrave, R . M . 1986.
Skyline thinning in a westem hemlock-Sitka spmce
stand: harvesting costs and stand damage. Oregon
State University, College of Forestry, Forest Research
Labratory, CorvaUis, OR. Research Bulletin 53.21 pp.

Tesch, S.D.; Lysne, D.H.; Mann, J.W.; Helgerson, O.T.
1986. Mortality of regeneration during skyline
logging of a shelterwood overstory. Journal of
Forestiy, 84(6):49-50.

Lysons, H.H.; Twito, R.H. 1973. Skyline logging: an
economical means of reducing environmental
impact of logging. Journal of Forestry 71(9): 580-583.

U . S . Department of Agriculture ( U S D A ) , Forest
Service. 1978. National forest landscape management - timber. Washington, D C . Agriculture
Handbook No. 559, Vol. 2. Chapters, pp. 174-185.

Mann, C . N . 1977. Running skyline systems for
harvesting timber on steep terrain. Society of
Automotive Engineers, Earthmoving Industry
Conference, Central Illinois Section, Peoria, IL.
April 18-20, 1977.6 pp.

Weetman, G.F.; Panozzo, E.; Jull, M . ; Marek, K . 1990.
A n assessment of opportunities for altemative
silvicultural systems in the SBS, I C H and ESSE
biogeoclimatic zones of the Prince Rupert Forest
Region. Contract report for the British Columbia
Ministry of Forest, Prince Rupert Forest Region,
Smitiiers, B C . 154 pp.

M i t c h e l l , S. 1993. A n assessment of windthrow
potential in proposed uniform shelterwood cuts in
the Kyuquot Sound area. Contract report for F E R I C ,
Vancouver, B C . 26 pp.
18

Appendix I
Hourly Equipment Costs for Cable-Yarding Systems
S w i n g yarder
80 OOP k g class

Tower yarder
50 OOP k g class

L o g loader
50 OOP k g class

1 35P POP
9 0PP
7
1 6PP
30
IP.P
2.5

825 PPP
9 PPP
7
I 600
3P
IP.P
2.5

6PP PPO

4P7 7PP
883 35P

25P 2PP
542 100

18P00P
39P PPP

L o s s i n resale value ((P-S)/D«h) $/h
Interest = ( ( I n f A V I ) / h ) $/h
Insurance = ((Ins«AVI)/h) $/h

84.94
55.21
13.8P

52.13
33.88
8.47

37.5P
24.38
6.09

Total ownership costs ( O W )

153.95

94.48

67.97

5P
0.4P
10

4P
P.40
IP

4P
P.4P
IP

I 2PP
15 SPP
3 5P0
I P POP
5P PPP

9PP
SPP
6 lOP
3 9PP
I P PPP
35 PPP

2 5P0
2PP0P

24.P4
26.71
24.P4
21.74
20.61
2P.41

23.41
26.P1
24.P4
21.74
2P.61
4P.82

40

4P

20.PP
2.PP
12.81
6.25
31.25
158.91
231.22

16.00
1.6P
7.31
6.25
21.88
IS6.5P
239.54

1.56
12.50
69.P7
1PP.73

385.17

334.P2

168.701

Y a r d i n g and L o a d i n g "
OWNERSHIP COSTS

Purchase price (?) $
Machine
M e c h a n i c a l s l a c k - p u l l i n g carriage
Depreciation period ( D ) y
Scheduled hours per year (h) h
Salvage value as % o f P (s) %
Interest rate (Int) %
Insurance rate (Ins) %
Salvage value (S)=(P»s/I0P) $
Average investment (AVI)=((P+S)/2) $

$/h

~

7
1 60P
3P
IP.P
2.5

PERATING AND REPAIR COSTS

F u e l consumption (F) L / h
F u e l cost (fc) $ / L
L u b e and o i l cost as % fiiel cost (fp) %
Pro-rated annual w i r e rope cost (wc) $
Skyline
Mainline
Haulback
Other lines, chokers, etc.
A n n u a l cost o f supplies and rigging materials (SR) $
A n n u a l repair and maintenance cost (Rp) $
Wages ( W ) $/h
M a c h i n e operator
i n c l u d i n g machine servicing allowance
Hooktender
R i g g i n g slinger
Chaser
Chokersetters
T .anding bucker
Wage benefit loading ( W B L ) %
F u e l cost (F«fc) $/h
L u b e and o i l cost ((fp/lPP)»(F«fc)) $/h
W i r e rope cost (wc/h) $/h
Supplies and rigging materials cost (SR/h) $/h
Repair and maintenance cost (Rp/h) $/h
L a b o u r cost (W»(1-^WBL/1PP)) $/h
Total operating and repair costs (OP) $/h
TOTAL OWNERSHIP AND OPERATING COSTS ( O W + O P ) $/h
"

22.77
25.29

24.P4
40
16.PP
1.60

These figures are based on FERIC's standard costing methodology for determining machine ownership and operating costs, and do not
include such costs as crew transportation, supervision, profit, and office overhead. IWA rates effective June 15/96 have been used.
^ Double mainlines on the swing yarder.
' Armual costs for repairs and maintenance are estimated by FERIC, with input from Interfor.
The machine servicing allowance for operators is 2/3 of 1 hour at the overtime rate. It is prorated over an average shift length of 9 hours
for this analysis.
One chokersetter was used on the swing yarder; two chokersetters were used on the tower yarder.

19

Appendix II
Hourly Falling and Bucking Cost
Falling and Bucking"
Wages for one faller (W) $/shift
Wage benefit loading (WBL) %
Cost of saw, gas and oil, and supplies (Sw) $/shift
Shift lengdi (SI) h

284.44
40
80.00
6.5

Labour cost = ((W«(l+WBL/100))/sl)
Saw, gas and oil, and supplies (Sw/Sl) $/h

61.26
12.31

Total falling and bucking cost per faller $/h

73.57

^ These figures are based on FERIC's standard costing methodology, and do not include such costs as crew transportation, supervision,
profit, and office overhead. The IWA rate effective June 15/96 has been used.

20

head office
siege social

western division
division de I'ouest

eastern division
division de rest

580 boul. Saint-Jean
Pointe-Claire, Quebec
Canada H9R 3J9
1:514-694-1140
F: 514-694-4351
E: admin@mtl.feric.ca

2601 East Mall
Vancouver, BC
Canada V6T1Z4
1:604-228-1555
F: 604-228-0999
E: admin@vcr.feric.ca

580 boul. Saint-Jean
Pointe-Claire, Quebec
Canada H9R 3J9
7:514-694-1140
F: 514-694-4351
E: admin@mtl.feric.ca

