Article
Steep Slope Harvest System Models for Small to Large Trees
Todd West 1 , John Sessions 1 and Bogdan M. Strimbu 1,2, *

                                          1   Department of Forest Engineering and Resource Management, Oregon State University,
                                              Corvallis, OR 97331, USA; todd.west@oregonstate.edu (T.W.); john.sessions@oregonstate.edu (J.S.)
                                          2   Faculty of Silviculture and Forest Engineering, Transilvania University of Brasov, 500036 Brasov, Romania
                                          *   Correspondence: bogdan.strimbu@oregonstate.edu


                                          Abstract: Background: Tethered cut-to-length and cable yarding systems with tethered falling equip-
                                          ment are increasingly used to harvest trees from slopes exceeding 30–60% more safely and at reduced
                                          financial cost than less mechanized harvest systems. Existing studies of harvest equipment typically
                                          isolate one or two pieces of equipment in a harvest system and often occur on sites with slopes below
                                          50% and trees less than 60 cm in diameter. Methods: We analyzed machine capabilities and productiv-
                                          ity regressions to extrapolate existing models to steep slope harvesting of trees up to 115 cm diameter.
                                          The resulting individual machine models are integrated into models of cut-to-length and long-log
                                          harvest system productivity. We estimated the financial operating costs of the harvest systems
                                          considered from equipment pricing and operator wages. Results: Analysis of even-age Douglas-fir
                                          (Pseudotsuga menziesii) and western hemlock (Tsuga heterophylla) rotations suggests eight-wheel for-
                                          warder productivity, swing yarder productivity, and mechanization of manual chainsaw labor with
                                          tethered harvesters as primary controls on harvest costs. Conclusions: The proposed model enables
                                          predictions across a greater range of slopes and tree sizes than those previously modeled, creating a
                                          foundation for future research into the cost and productivity of steep slope harvesting systems.


                                Keywords: productivity and costs of forest operations; cut-to-length; winch-assist harvesting; cable
                                   logging; Douglas-fir; western hemlock
Citation: West, T.; Sessions, J.;
Strimbu, B.M. Steep Slope Harvest
System Models for Small to Large
Trees. Forests 2022, 13, 305. https://    1. Introduction
doi.org/10.3390/f13020305
                                                Models of timber harvest systems are used to support silvicultural decision-making.
Academic Editors: Andrea Laschi,          Silvicultural optimization systems (e.g., [1,2]) rely on harvest system models, along with
Dalia Abbas and Piotr S. Mederski         other models, to guide land management planning. An inaccurate harvest model can lead
                                          to a poor plan and, if limits on harvest equipment capabilities are incorrectly represented,
Received: 20 January 2022
Accepted: 9 February 2022
                                          may result in infeasible plans. To implement a land management plan, forest harvest
Published: 13 February 2022
                                          contractors need to determine if equipment in the harvest systems they operate is suitable
                                          for a given timber sale. Contractors also need to accurately predict stump to mill costs
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral      to bid sales competitively without incurring a financial loss. Harvest system models
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
                                          thus facilitate both land management and harvest contracting by describing the abilities,
published maps and institutional affil-
                                          productivity, operating costs, and interactions of the individual machines in each harvest
iations.
                                          system of interest. Given an understanding of the trees offered in a timber sale and the logs
                                          that would be produced from those trees, a harvest cost model predicts each machine’s
                                          utilization and the total financial cost for the harvest. Comparing cost estimates between
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
                                          models of different harvest systems helps identify the most appropriate harvest method
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.        based on ecological and financial considerations.
This article is an open access article          On harvest units with steep slopes, cable yarding systems have been used to remove
distributed under the terms and           felled trees, or logs cut from felled trees, since the late 1800s [3]. When a slope is too steep
conditions of the Creative Commons        for mechanized harvesting equipment, trees are manually felled using chainsaws [4]. One
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://     or more logs are often bucked from these trees before yarding, also using chainsaws [5].
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/          Because mechanization reduces risk to human operators and increases productivity com-
4.0/).                                    pared to manual felling and bucking [6], commercial winch-assist systems enabled use of



Forests 2022, 13, 305. https://doi.org/10.3390/f13020305                                                        https://www.mdpi.com/journal/forests
Forests 2022, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                                2 of 17


Forests 2022, 13, 305                                                                                                                               2 of 16
                                 Because mechanization reduces risk to human operators and increases productivity com-
                                 pared to manual felling and bucking [6], commercial winch-assist systems enabled use of
                                 feller-bunchers, harvesters,
                                 feller-bunchers,    harvesters, and
                                                                   andforwarders
                                                                         forwarderson onsteep
                                                                                          steepslopes
                                                                                                 slopesininthe late
                                                                                                             the    1990s
                                                                                                                 late     [7].[7].
                                                                                                                      1990s     Manufac-
                                                                                                                                   Manu-
                                 facturers introduced winch assist as a standard option on harvest equipment in the early
                                 turers   introduced    winch    assist as a standard   option   on  harvest   equipment     in
                                 2010s [8,9]
                                 2010s   [8,9] and
                                               and indicate
                                                    indicate heavy
                                                              heavy equipment
                                                                       equipment use on slopes
                                                                                            slopes up
                                                                                                    up toto 100%
                                                                                                            100% [10,11],
                                                                                                                  [10,11], substantially
                                                                                                                           substantially
                                 steeper than
                                 steeper   than the
                                                 the 30–40%
                                                     30–40% often
                                                               often allowed
                                                                      allowed for
                                                                               for untethered
                                                                                   untetheredequipment
                                                                                                 equipment[12,13].
                                                                                                               [12,13].
                                        Currently,most
                                       Currently,   most winch-assisted
                                                           winch-assisted harvesting
                                                                             harvesting uses
                                                                                          uses one
                                                                                               one ofof three
                                                                                                        three mechanized
                                                                                                               mechanized steep
                                                                                                                              steep slope
                                                                                                                                     slope
                                 harvest systems
                                 harvest   systems (Figure
                                                     (Figure 1).
                                                              1). Each
                                                                  Each of these harvest systems consists
                                                                                                    consists of either a feller-buncher
                                                                                                                         feller-buncher
                                 or aa harvester
                                 or    harvester followed
                                                  followed byby anan appropriate
                                                                     appropriate set
                                                                                   set of
                                                                                       of machines
                                                                                          machines forfor moving
                                                                                                           moving wood
                                                                                                                    wood toto aa road
                                                                                                                                 road and
                                                                                                                                       and
                                 then trucking
                                 then   trucking it to
                                                     to aa mill.
                                                           mill. In all three systems, chainsaws are used in a supporting role.
                                 Treesmay
                                 Trees   mayalso
                                               alsobe
                                                    beswung
                                                       swungshortshortdistances
                                                                        distancesas
                                                                                  asin
                                                                                     inshovel
                                                                                        shovellogging
                                                                                                logging(also
                                                                                                           (alsocalled
                                                                                                                 calledhoe
                                                                                                                        hoechucking).
                                                                                                                              chucking).




                                 Figure 1. Stump to mill flow of wood in three steep slope harvest systems. In system (a), a tethered
                                 Figure 1. Stump to mill flow of wood in three steep slope harvest systems. In system (a), a tethered
                                 harvester-forwarder pair provides cut-to-length harvesting suitable for thinning and continuous
                                 harvester-forwarder pair provides cut-to-length harvesting suitable for thinning and continuous
                                 cover forestry, variable retention harvests, or clearfelling. Systems based on yarders (b,c) can be
                                 cover  forestry,
                                 used for         variable
                                           thinning        retention
                                                      but are        harvests,inor
                                                              most efficient       clearfelling.
                                                                                 clearfelling [5].Systems based on yarders (b,c) can be used
                                 for thinning but are most efficient in clearfelling [5].
                                        Each piece of heavy equipment in a harvest system has size or weight restrictions on
                                       Each piece of heavy equipment in a harvest system has size or weight restrictions
                                 the wood it can handle (Section 2.1). Trees that are too large will not fit in felling or pro-
                                 on the wood it can handle (Section 2.1). Trees that are too large will not fit in felling or
                                 cessing heads for cutting or may weigh too much for equipment booms to lift or drag.
                                 processing heads for cutting or may weigh too much for equipment booms to lift or drag.
                                 Logs too heavy for a forwarder’s crane cannot be lifted into its bunk. Similarly, skyline
                                 Logs too heavy for a forwarder’s crane cannot be lifted into its bunk. Similarly, skyline
                                 deflection determines maximum payload weights in yarding. However, growing large
                                 deflection determines maximum payload weights in yarding. However, growing large
                                 trees on
                                 trees    onslopes
                                              slopesofof   50–100%
                                                        50–100%      is aisfrequent
                                                                             a frequent       silvicultural
                                                                                        silvicultural            objective
                                                                                                          objective    withinwithin
                                                                                                                                 westernwestern      North
                                                                                                                                            North Amer-
                                 America’s      temperate      rainforests      for   reasons     such    as  conserving
                                 ica’s temperate rainforests for reasons such as conserving biodiversity, restoring wildlife  biodiversity,      restoring
                                 wildlifecarbon
                                 habitat,    habitat,   carbon sequestration,
                                                     sequestration,      and raisingand    the raising
                                                                                                financialthe    financial
                                                                                                             value           value
                                                                                                                     of timber        of timber[14–16].
                                                                                                                                  assortments       assort-
                                 ments     [14–16].  Additionally,       forest    management          considering      the
                                 Additionally, forest management considering the social cost of carbon favors increased tree social  cost   of  carbon   fa-
                                 vors   increased   tree   size  [17]. Since     dominant      individuals      on  productive
                                 size [17]. Since dominant individuals on productive rainforest sites can average diameter          rainforest    sites can
                                 averagerates
                                 growth      diameter
                                                   above growth     rates −above
                                                             1 cm year        1 [18],1 trees
                                                                                        cm year      −1 [18], trees can exceed small yarder pay-
                                                                                                can exceed      small yarder payload capacities
                                 by age 40 and reach eight-wheel harvester limits by age limits
                                 load   capacities   by   age  40  and   reach     eight-wheel      harvester              by age2.3).
                                                                                                                   65 (Section      65 (Section     2.3). In
                                                                                                                                          In northwest-
                                 northwestern       United     States   rainforests,      coast   Douglas-fir      (Pseudotsuga
                                 ern United States rainforests, coast Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii var menziesii (Mirb.)       menziesii   var   men-
                                 ziesii  (Mirb.)  Franco)     and   western      hemlock      (Tsuga     heterophylla    (Raf.)
                                 Franco) and western hemlock (Tsuga heterophylla (Raf.) Sarg.) trees are commonly harvested      Sarg.)  trees   are  com-
                                 monly
                                 from      harvested
                                        coastal         from coastal
                                                  and inland      mountain andranges
                                                                                  inlandat  mountain
                                                                                              ages 40–50.  ranges    at ages
                                                                                                               Harvest         40–50.
                                                                                                                           at ages   of Harvest
                                                                                                                                        60–100 yearsat ages
                                                                                                                                                          is
                                 of 60–100
                                 also          yearsinterest
                                      of regular      is also of   regular
                                                                [19–21].       interest
                                                                            This           [19–21]. of
                                                                                   combination         This  combination
                                                                                                          rapid   growth, large of rapid
                                                                                                                                     trees,growth,    large
                                                                                                                                             and rugged
                                 trees, and
                                 terrain       rugged
                                            creates need  terrain   creates
                                                             for steep    slopeneed    for steep
                                                                                   harvest     systemslope   harvest
                                                                                                          models        system
                                                                                                                     that   remain models    thatfor
                                                                                                                                      accurate     remain
                                                                                                                                                       tree
                                 accurate for
                                 diameters     uptree  diameters
                                                   to 100             up to 100 cm or larger.
                                                            cm or larger.
                                        Because existing
                                       Because     existingmodels
                                                               modelsofofheavy heavyharvest
                                                                                         harvest    equipment
                                                                                                  equipment         apply
                                                                                                                 apply       primarily
                                                                                                                          primarily        to trees
                                                                                                                                       to trees       ofcm
                                                                                                                                                  of 60   60
                                 cm   diameter     or  smaller    on   slopes     less  than   50%     (Section    2.1),
                                 diameter or smaller on slopes less than 50% (Section 2.1), this study models mechanized  this  study   models     mecha-
                                 nized harvesting
                                 harvesting     of largerof trees
                                                             largerontrees
                                                                         steeperon steeper
                                                                                     slopes. slopes.       We therefore
                                                                                                We therefore       (1) review (1) and
                                                                                                                                   review    andcurrent
                                                                                                                                        extend      extend
                                 current equipment
                                 equipment      modelingmodeling
                                                              approaches,  approaches,
                                                                                 (2) evaluate(2) the
                                                                                                   evaluate    the proposed
                                                                                                        proposed      extensionsextensions
                                                                                                                                     by estimating by esti-
                                                                                                                                                        un-
                                 mating uncertainty
                                 certainty    in predictionsin predictions
                                                                  of harvestof       harvest productivity
                                                                                  productivity       and cost in  andtwocost  in two Douglas-fir
                                                                                                                           Douglas-fir      and western and
                                 western hemlock
                                 hemlock                 case(3)
                                              case studies,     studies,
                                                                   estimate (3) harvest
                                                                                 estimatecostharvest     cost sensitivity
                                                                                                   sensitivity    to model to     model
                                                                                                                               input       input param-
                                                                                                                                       parameters,     and
                                 (4) identify
                                 eters,   and (4)areas   where
                                                   identify        additional
                                                               areas                research isresearch
                                                                       where additional             neededistoneeded
                                                                                                                   reducetouncertainty         in harvest
                                                                                                                                reduce uncertainty        in
                                 system models. The following sections describe the cost and productivity modeling ap-
                                 proach used for the three steep slope harvest systems in Figure 1, present harvest cost
Forests 2022, 13, 305                                                                                                                               3 of 16




                                       probability distributions for even-age coast Douglas-fir and western hemlock, and discuss
                                       limitations arising from the lack of large tree data and productivity models for some types
                                       of equipment.

                                       2. Materials and Methods
                                       2.1. Harvest Equipment Productivity Models
                                            A literature search identified 20 sources (Table 1) with 44 productivity models of
                                       interest published in the last 25 years. Twenty-two of these models appeared to be error-
                                       free and we were able to identify and correct errors in the equations of six others, resulting
                                       in Table 1. Eight of the remaining 16 models had errors that we were unable to repair and
                                       eight had forms unsuited to prediction. Therefore, we excluded these 16 models. We also
                                       excluded models lacking goodness of fit information, models with adjusted R2 < 0.25, and
                                       sources older than 25 years. Among the resulting 20 sources, only the chainsaw productivity
                                       models included felling or bucking on slopes greater than 47%. No mechanized study
                                       indicated an average tree volume greater than 2.6 m3 .

                                       Table 1. Cycle time definitions for productivity of harvest equipment used in steep slope mechanized
                                       logging and maximum slopes considered by previous studies. We propose two unified forms for
                                       cycle time models, one for machines with stemwise cycles and one for machines with roundtrip
                                       cycles (Equations (1) and (2)).

                         Cycle                                                                                                                Additional
  Machine Type                     Winch-Assist               Cycle Description(s)                  Model Sources     Slopes Considered (%)
                         Type                                                                                                                  Sources
  feller-buncher        stemwise       yes              move to, fell, and bunch one tree                [22]                32–47             [23–25]
                                                                                                                              likely
    harvester           stemwise       yes         move to tree, fell, buck, and bunch all logs        [26–30]                                 [31–40]
                                                                                                                               <30
                                                   move to tree, variable cutting from bucking
    chainsaw            stemwise       no                                                               [41,42]              0–130               [43]
                                                   only first log to felling and bucking all logs
                                                      load one bunkload of logs in unit and
                                                   unload the bunk to roadside sort piles or to                            very likely        [32–36,38–
    forwarder       roundtrip          yes                                                           [26,29,44–48]
                                                   a truck, potentially also loading piled logs                               ≤45              40,49,50]
                                                                    onto truck
                                                   outhaul carriage, grapple or choke payload
                                                                                                                            typically
      yarder        roundtrip          no            of trees and logs, inhaul carriage, drop         [4,5,51–53]                             [35,54–56]
                                                                                                                              <80
                                                        payload on road or landing chute
                                                        (1) buck one tree and bunch logs
    processor           stemwise       no                                                                [46]                 <10                [57]
                                                         (2) swing yarded log to bunch
                                                    (1) pile one bunch of logs from processor
      loader            stemwise       no                                                           none identified                             [45,49]
                                                         (2) load one grapple onto truck
                                                    drive to unit, load logs into one or more
     log truck      roundtrip          no                                                                [58]            unclear but >11        [59,60]
                                                        bunks, drive to mill, unload logs
                                       Log truck types considered in this study are mule trains with two bunks of logs, often ≤7.6 m and ≤10.1 m long,
                                       and long log trucks with one bunk of logs ≤ 12.5 m long. We also searched for sources on winch-assisted skidding
                                       but did not find published evidence of its uphill use on slopes above 35% [61,62].


                                             Lack of productivity models covering slopes of 47–100% and trees with merchantable
                                       volumes up to 15 m3 required these existing models be extended beyond their fitting
                                       ranges. We chose to extend cycle time models since most models that regressed produc-
                                       tivity directly exhibited poor out of range behaviors, including prediction of negative m3
                                       PMh0 −1 (merchantable cubic meters of wood per delay-free productive machine hour)
                                       or implausibly high productivities for their machine type. For machines with stemwise
                                       cycles (Table 1), the most common model forms for predicting the total cutting time Tc for
                                       a given stem s were subsets of a per-stem equipment move time plus a power series of
                                       either the tree’s merchantable volume Vs or a highly correlated measure of tree size such as
                                       diameter at breast height. The per-stem move time is determined by the distance Dmove,s the
                                       equipment must move to reach stem s and the speed vs at which the equipment moves as a
                                       function of the local slope Ss , traction Ts available due to surface conditions, the amount of
                                       brush B present, and possibly other factors. As only one source [57] found evidence for
                                       higher-order terms in volume, we assumed the quadratic model form
Forests 2022, 13, 305                                                                                                                                          4 of 16




                                                               nq
                                                                      (                                       !        (                                   !
                         Dmove,s                                          0                       Vs ≤ b3,q                0                   Ss ≤ St,m
    Tc,m stemwise =                         +   b0,m + b1,m Vs + ∑                           2                   1+                                              (1)
                    vs (Ss , Ts , B, . . .)                    q =1       b2,q Vs − b3,m,q        Vs > b3,q                b4,m (Ss − St,m )   Ss > St,m

                                        where b{0,1,2,3},m ≥ 0 are the felling and bucking coefficients for a particular machine of
                                        interest m and St,m is the slope at which machine productivity begins to decrease. Models
                                        with quadratic terms commonly assume b3,m = 0 but we allow b3,m > 0 as in Hildt et al. [47]
                                        and use up to two quadratic terms (nq ≤ 2) to obtain productivity curves with shapes
                                        similar to those found by Visser and Spinelli [30] for trees of volume up to 5.2 m3 . The
                                        slope term b4,m (Ss –St,m ) is a linearization used in industry and is consistent with published
                                        estimates of slope effects [33,62].
                                              For machines with roundtrip cycle times, a majority of sources (Table 1) used models
                                        that implicitly or explicitly performed piecewise integration of mean unloaded and loaded
                                        travel speeds vs over a series of segments {s} with individual lengths Ds . With the inclusion
                                        of time t spent loading and unloading, a model for roundtrip cycle time Tc is

                          nu                                                      nl
                                  Ds,unloaded                                                 Ds,loaded
       Tc,roundtrip = ∑                                + tload Np , Ns , . . . + ∑
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                     + tunload Np , Ns , . . .                    (2)
                            v          (S , T , . . .)
                         s=1 s,unloaded s s
                                                                                     v       (S , T , P , P , . . .)
                                                                                 s=1 s,loaded s s e l

                                               While loaded and unloaded travel is frequently simplified to an average roundtrip
                                        speed over a single segment, more detailed approaches recognize uphill travel may be
                                        constrained by engine power Pe and payload Pl [58,62] as well as slope (Ss ) and traction
                                        (Ts ) [29,48,63]. The use of winch assist may increase [62] or decrease [36] travel speeds,
                                        potentially requiring tethered segments be modelled separately from untethered segments
                                        where winch assist is not used. Load and unload times are likely to increase with the
                                        number of timber assortments Ns in the load [29] and the number of pieces (trees or logs)
                                        Np [4,47] transported, though the latter is routinely mitigated by grappling multiple pieces
                                        simultaneously or by yarding and swinging whole trees.
                                               In addition to being specific to machine capabilities [28,29] model coefficients are likely
                                        to be tree species specific, both due to crown architecture [25,29] and differences in stem
                                        density and bark losses [64,65], which alter the amount of merchantable wood volume in
                                        a given payload weight. We provide specifics of the model parameterizations we use for
                                        feller-bunchers, harvesters, chainsaws, forwarders, yarders, processors, loaders, and log
                                        trucks with Douglas-fir and western hemlock in the Supplementary Material (Section S1).
                                        Since these parameters are extrapolated, we treat them as uncertain and include their
                                        uncertainty in estimates of harvest cost (Section 2.3).

                                        2.2. Equipment Operating Cost and Harvest Contracting Business Models
                                              Most harvest cost studies (Section 2.1) follow Miyata’s method [66] for finding equip-
                                        ment operating costs. Under Miyata’s method, costs are most sensitive to equipment
                                        depreciation, equipment utilization, and operator wages and compensation. We gathered
                                        a dataset of asking prices for harvest equipment offered for sale (n = 261) and, where
                                        sufficient data was available, estimated depreciation rates from nonlinear regressions of
                                        price versus operating hours. Machine utilization was estimated from figures reported in
                                        the literature review and operators’ total compensation was estimated from job postings for
                                        positions in Oregon and Washington’s temperate rainforests (a region of the northwestern
                                        United States where tethered equipment is used). We then extended Miyata’s method to
                                        the consider the taxes, profit, and risk of a harvest contracting business beyond the cost
                                        of its equipment and operators. Similar to the productivity model parameterizations, we
                                        provide details of the business cost estimates for the 11 types of equipment we consider in
                                        the Supplementary Material (Section S2).
Forests 2022, 13, 305                                                                                           5 of 16




                        2.3. Harvest System Modeling and Uncertainty Estimation
                             A harvest system’s financial cost is the total cost of its machines and their operators.
                        In addition to the cost of operating the system to produce merchantable wood we included
                        the costs Ct for moving equipment into and out of a harvest unit, reopening roads, and
                        other harvest related tasks (Supplementary Material, Section S3). When using cycle time
                        productivity models (Section 2.1), a machine’s wood production cost is found by multi-
                        plying the total cycle time Tm over the nc cycles required to move the volume of wood
                        harvested by the machine’s cost per productive machine hour Cm (US$ PMh0 −1 in this
                        study). The harvest cost for a system with nm machines is therefore
                                                                       !
                                                         nm    nc                    nt
                                              Csystem = ∑      ∑ Tc,m    Cm,PMh0 + ∑ Ct,related                    (3)
                                                        m =1   c =1                 t =1

                             Harvest costs are typically lowest when machines can operate independently of each
                        other (also referred to as decoupled operation) as doing so maximizes their utilization
                        and minimizes operating cost. We assume independent operation for feller-bunchers,
                        harvesters, chainsaws, forwarders, and log trucks. Utilization of yarders, processors, and
                        loaders, however, is likely interdependent. When one of these three machines restricted the
                        productivity of the other two, we adjusted the costs of the affected machines accordingly
                        (Section S3). When trees exceeded machine limits (Section S4), we included the cost of the
                        chainsaw work needed to make wood accessible for mechanized movement.
                             We defined 72 productivity, 838 cost model, and 36 equipment limit parameters across
                        the harvest systems considered (Sections S1–S4). We estimated harvest cost probability
                        distributions empirically using 10,000 Monte Carlo draws of 68 parameters (48 productivity,
                        14 cost, and six limit). Given the lack of previous studies, we treated parameter ranges
                        as uninformative Bayesian priors with uniform probability distributions estimated by
                        Uusitalo et al.’s [67] expert judgement method. Simplification of Miyata models to uncertain
                        operating costs per scheduled machine hour (US$ SMh−1 ) caused 94% of the reduction
                        from the 946 parameters defined to the 68 Monte Carlo parameters (Section S2). The rest
                        of the reduction was due to overlap among and quantization of forwarder parameters
                        (Section S1.2) and holding biometric or harvest unit properties, such as bark losses and
                        available soil traction, constant to avoid confounding harvest system variability with
                        biological, seasonal, or unit-specific sources of variability.
                             Finally, we estimated cost model sensitivity to the 68 Monte Carlo parameters using
                        total Sobol’ indices [68] at N = 1500 (N(k + 2) = 105,000, Jansen estimator [69]) in order to
                        prioritize model parameters for future investigation. We chose to use total Sobol’ indices as
                        they provide a comprehensive, variance-based measure of model sensitivity by considering
                        a parameter’s direct effect and its interactions with all other parameters.

                        2.4. Growth and Yield Modeling, Taper Equation Interactions, and Thinning Intensities
                             We initialized the northwest Oregon variant of the nonspatial, individual tree growth
                        model Organon [70,71] with measurements from 30-year-old, even-age Douglas-fir and
                        western hemlock permanent sample plots [18] and projected stand growth over the next
                        55–70 years. For each five-year timestep, we estimated per hectare harvest cost probability
                        distributions for unthinned and thinned rotations by calculating stemwise cycle times for
                        each individual tree present in the growth model and roundtrip cycle times for the volume
                        of wood harvested per hectare. Stem cutting diameters and piece weights were estimated
                        from using species specific taper equations, densities, and rates of bark loss [64,72–74].
                        Financially preferred rotations, thinning intensities, and timings were identified by classic
                        Faustmann land expectation values [75] calculated from mean timber prices over the past
                        decade [76] net of harvest costs at a 4% discount rate [77]. We considered even-age rotations
                        with up to three proportional thins and harvest intensities from 20–50% for each thin with
                        step sizes of 1–3%.
           Forests
Forests 2022,      2022, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW
              13, 305                                                                                                                         6 of 17      6 of 16



                                            decade [76] net of harvest costs at a 4% discount rate [77]. We considered even-age rota-
                                       3. Results
                                           tions with up to three proportional thins and harvest intensities from 20–50% for each thin
                                            with step sizes of differences
                                            Physiological      1–3%.       between coast Douglas-fir and western hemlock resulted
                                       in distinct silvicultural approaches, harvest cost distributions, and patterns of harvest
                                            3. Results
                                       equipment selection (Figures 2–5). Douglas-fir is a shade intermediate species capable
                                                  Physiological differences between coast Douglas-fir and western hemlock resulted in
                                       of more rapid growth than the shade tolerant western hemlock (50-year site indices of
                                            distinct silvicultural approaches, harvest cost distributions, and patterns of harvest equip-
                                       39.6 ment
                                            and 29.1      m, respectively,
                                                   selection    (Figures 2–5). for    the site isused
                                                                                  Douglas-fir            in this
                                                                                                   a shade          study [18])
                                                                                                               intermediate        hascapable
                                                                                                                               species  mean wood of moreprices 22%
                                       higher
                                            rapid growth than the shade tolerant western hemlock (50-year site indices of 39.6 and therefore
                                                [76],   and    log  densities      9%   lower    [64]  than     hemlock.      Douglas-fir     rotations
                                       supported       up to threefor
                                            29.1 m, respectively,       thins
                                                                           the beginning        at age
                                                                                site used in this   study35,[18])
                                                                                                               rather   than wood
                                                                                                                   has mean    at most    one22%
                                                                                                                                      prices    thinning
                                                                                                                                                   higher for hem-
                                            [76], and    log  densities   9%  lower    [64]  than  hemlock.     Douglas-fir
                                       lock (Figures 2 and 4a,e). Douglas-fir trees grew to larger sizes and produced          rotations  therefore  sup-
                                                                                                                                                        larger logs
                                            ported    up  to three  thins  beginning     at age  35, rather   than  at most
                                       than western hemlock even though Douglas-fir rotations were 15 years shorter than hem-one  thinning   for hemlock
                                       lock(Figures
                                             rotations  2 and   4a,e). Douglas-fir
                                                            (Figures     3 and 5i–k). trees   grew to equipment
                                                                                           Harvest     larger sizes and     produced
                                                                                                                         therefore      larger logs than
                                                                                                                                      encountered      larger stem-
                                            western hemlock even though Douglas-fir rotations were 15 years shorter than hemlock
                                       wise quadratic cycle time contributions (Equation (1)) in Douglas-fir. Douglas-firs were also
                                            rotations (Figures 3 and 5i,j,k). Harvest equipment therefore encountered larger stemwise
                                       morequadratic
                                              likely tocycle
                                                           exceedtimemechanized
                                                                        contributionsequipment
                                                                                          (Equation (1))limits    (Sections 2.3
                                                                                                             in Douglas-fir.       and S4), resulting
                                                                                                                                Douglas-firs   were alsoin greater
                                       costsmore
                                              for manual
                                                    likely to exceed mechanized equipment limits (Sections 2.3 and S4), resulting inthese two
                                                                chainsaw       labor    beginning       from     age   45  (Figure   6).  Combined,
                                       effects  led to
                                            greater        well-defined
                                                       costs                  minima labor
                                                              for manual chainsaw          in Douglas-fir
                                                                                                  beginning from harvest     cost
                                                                                                                        age 45     around
                                                                                                                                (Figure       age 50–60 whereas
                                                                                                                                          6). Combined,
                                            these  two    effects led  to well-defined     minima    in Douglas-fir
                                       minima were absent or shallow for western hemlock (Figures 2 and 4a,b,e,f).      harvest  cost around   age 50–60
                                                                                                                                                     Despite these
                                            whereas     minima    were    absent  or shallow    for  western    hemlock
                                       differences, overall ranges of harvest costs were similar between the two species,  (Figures  2 and  4a,b,e,f). De- though
                                            spite these differences, overall ranges of harvest costs were similar between the two spe-
                                       thinning in hemlock tended to be somewhat more expensive (Table 2).
                                            cies, though thinning in hemlock tended to be somewhat more expensive (Table 2).




                                            Figure 2. Estimated range of coast Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii var menziesii (Mirb.) Franco)
                                       Figure  2. Estimated range of coast Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii var menziesii (Mirb.) Franco)
                                            harvest costs as a function of harvest unit slope, tethered corridor length (a,b,e,f), and the lowest
                                       harvest costs as a function of harvest unit slope, tethered corridor length (a,b,e,f), and the lowest
                                       cost regeneration harvest system (c,d,g,h) across 10,000 Monte Carlo draws of harvest cost model
                                       parameter sets. (i) and (j) indicate the corresponding harvest volumes and (k) the eight-wheel
                                       forwarder payload in merchantable m3 . Rotations less than 50 years are unthinned, rotations of
                                       50–60 years include one proportional thin at age 35–40, rotations of 65–70 years have two proportional
                                       thins at ages 35 and 45–50, and rotations of 75–85 years have three proportional thins at ages 35, 45,
                                       and 55–65 years. All things were performed by an eight-wheel harvester-forwarder pair.
                                     cost regeneration harvest system (c,d,g,h) across 10,000 Monte Carlo draws of harvest cost model
                                     parameter sets. (i) and (j) indicate the corresponding harvest volumes and (k) the eight-wheel for-
                                     warder payload in merchantable m3. Rotations less than 50 years are unthinned, rotations of 50–60
Forests 2022, 13, 305                years include one proportional thin at age 35–40, rotations of 65–70 years have two proportional 7 of 16
                                     thins at ages 35 and 45–50, and rotations of 75–85 years have three proportional thins at ages 35, 45,
                                     and 55–65 years. All things were performed by an eight-wheel harvester-forwarder pair.




                                  Figure 3.
                                 Figure     3. Harvest
                                                Harvestequipment
                                                         equipmentproductivity
                                                                       productivity   (a–h),  coast
                                                                                         (a–h),     Douglas-fir
                                                                                                coast  Douglas-firtreetree
                                                                                                                        sizes  (i,j),(i,j),
                                                                                                                             sizes    and and
                                                                                                                                            log sizes (k)
                                                                                                                                                 log sizes
                                  resulting    in the harvest  costs of Figure  2.  Insets  in (b) and  (f) show   the  full range    of  feller-buncher
                                 (k) resulting in the harvest costs of Figure 2. Insets in (b) and (f) show the full range of feller-buncher
                                  productivity. Productivity is measured in merchantable m33per delay-free productive machine hour
                                 productivity. Productivity is measured in merchantable              m per delay-free productive machine hour
                                  (PMh0). Tree and log sizes are also in merchantable m33using the BC Firmwood scale with 7.3 m logs
                                 (PMh  0 ).  Tree  and log sizes are also in merchantable       m
                                  from thinning and 12.2 m logs from regeneration harvests. Dashed  using  the BC Firmwood        scale withthe
                                                                                                                    line in (k) indicates       7.3upper
                                                                                                                                                    m logs
                                 from  thinning      and 12.2  m logs  from  regeneration      harvests.   Dashed    line in  (k)
                                  bound imposed by cable yarding weight limits. Logs which would exceed this bound must instead    indicates    the upper
                                 bound    imposed
                                  be bucked           by cable
                                                 to shorter,    yarding
                                                             yardable    weightLog
                                                                       lengths.    limits.  Logs
                                                                                        loader     which would
                                                                                                productivity       exceed
                                                                                                               is not  shown thisasbound     mustmodels
                                                                                                                                     no loader     instead
                                  were
                                 be     identified
                                     bucked           (Section
                                                to shorter,    2.1, Supplementary
                                                             yardable  lengths. Log Material      Table S1). is not shown as no loader models
                                                                                        loader productivity
                                 were identified (Section 2.1, Supplementary Material Table S1).

                                 Table 2. Means and 95% intervals (in parenthesis) observed across 10,000 Monte Carlo parameter
                                 draws for thinning and regeneration harvests in Douglas-fir and western hemlock. Time totals are
                                 PMh0 sums across all machines in the harvest systems considered (Figure 1), including trucking.

                 Summary Statistic                     Douglas-Fir               Western Hemlock                Hemlock Increase in Mean (%)
       thinning time (total PMh0     ha −1 )            36 (26–53)                   38 (21–55)                                  5.1
           thinning cost (US$ m −3 )                    45 (31–68)                   48 (31–74)                                  7.1
 regeneration harvest time (total PMh0 ha −1 )         115 (64–163)                 153 (69–220)                                 33.6
     regeneration harvest cost (US$ m −3 )              37 (30–46)                   38 (31–47)                                  0.9
Forests 2022, 13, 305                                                                                                                              8 of 16
       Forests 2022, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                               8 of 17




                                        Figure 4. Estimated range of western hemlock (Tsuga heterophylla (Raf.) Sarg.) harvest costs as a
                                     Figure 4. Estimated range of western hemlock (Tsuga heterophylla (Raf.) Sarg.) harvest costs as a
                                        function of slope and corridor length (a,b,e,f), lowest cost regeneration harvest system (c,d,g,h),
                                     function  of slope andharvest
                                        and corresponding     corridor  length(i)(a,b,e,f),
                                                                    volumes       and (j) inlowest cost regeneration
                                                                                             merchantable              harvest
                                                                                                           m3 ha−1. Rotations     system
                                                                                                                               less than 90(c,d,g,h), and
                                     corresponding     harvest
                                        years are unthinned  andvolumes
                                                                  rotations(i)
                                                                            of and
                                                                               90–100(j)years
                                                                                         in merchantable   m3 ha−1 . Rotations
                                                                                              include one proportional               less than
                                                                                                                        thin at age 45–70.  As 90 years
                                        with Douglas-fir, thins are performed   by  an  eight-wheel harvester-forwarder   pair  with
                                     are unthinned and rotations of 90–100 years include one proportional thin at age 45–70. As with forwarder
                                        payload in merchantable m3 shown in (k).
                                     Douglas-fir, thins are performed by an eight-wheel harvester-forwarder pair with forwarder payload
                                     in merchantable m3 shown in (k).

                                          Both extraction distance and slope significantly impacted harvest costs (p < 0.001).
                                     Increasing slope increased stemwise cycle times (Equation (1)), lowering productivity
                                     (Figures 3 and 5a,b,e,f) and, therefore, increased harvest cost as more machine hours were
                                     required to complete a harvest. Increasing slope from 65 to 80% decreased forwarder
                                     payload by 56% (Figures 2k and 4k, Equation (S1)), requiring 1.8 times as many forwarder
                                     turns to extract a given volume of wood. The corresponding increase in harvester hours
                                     was 1.13 times. Decreased payload was thus the primary cause of increased thinning
                                     costs on steeper slopes. Engine power did not limit forwarding speeds because driving
                                     speed while loading is more constraining than engine power. Similarly, extracting wood
                                     from 500 m long corridors increased forwarding times compared to 200 m long corridors,
                                     lowering forwarding productivity (Figures 3 and 5a,e) and also increasing thinning costs.
                                     Additionally, 500 m corridors exceeded the 280–350 m cable length limit of the add on
                                     winches available for use with eight-wheel harvesters and forwarders (Table S6). In such
                                     cases, harvesters and forwarders were supported by separate anchor machines, increasing
                                     costs compared to the use of an add-on winch powered by the harvester or forwarder.
Forests 2022, 13, 305                                                                                                                                9 of 16
        Forests 2022, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                9 of 17




                                         Figure
                                     Figure  5. 5.Harvest
                                                   Harvest equipment
                                                            equipment productivity
                                                                         productivity (a–h), western
                                                                                         (a–h),       hemlock
                                                                                                 western        tree sizes
                                                                                                           hemlock     tree(i,j),
                                                                                                                             sizesand(i,j),
                                                                                                                                       log sizes
                                                                                                                                            and (k)
                                                                                                                                                 log sizes
                                         resulting in the harvest costs of Figure 4. Units, scaling, and insets are the same as for Douglas-fir
                                     (k) resulting  in the harvest  costs of Figure  4. Units,  scaling, and  insets  are the   same   as  for
                                         (Figure 3) with the yarding weight limit indicated by the dashed line in (k) being lower as central   Douglas-fir
                                     (Figure  3) with
                                         estimates      the yarding
                                                   of hemlock’s      weight
                                                                 green        limit indicated
                                                                        wood density             by thethan
                                                                                       are 10% higher    dashed   line in (k) being lower as central
                                                                                                            for Douglas-fir.
                                     estimates of hemlock’s green wood density are 10% higher than for Douglas-fir.

                                           The long log systems used with regeneration harvests were less sensitive to slope and
                                     distance than the cut-to-length, eight-wheel harvester-forwarder system we assumed for
                                     thinning. Since yarders, processors, and loaders were assumed to operate from landings
                                     or roadsides, their productivity was unaffected by the harvest unit’s prevailing slope
                                     (Figures 3 and 5b–d,f–h). Similar to forwarding, yarding speeds did not appear to be
                                     constrained by engine power, possibly due to line speeds of partially suspended turns
                                     being limited by concern for hangups. Most cable yarders we surveyed could access the
                                     full length of 500 m corridors without cable extensions (Table S6). Additionally, the tracked
                                     feller-bunchers and harvesters considered were tethered by anchor machines and hence did
                                     require additional equipment to operate on corridors longer than 280–350 m. As slope and
                                     extraction distance increased, the long log systems exhibited an increasing cost advantage
                                     compared to a harvester-forwarder, cut-to-length system.
                                           Yarder productivity was influential to harvest equipment selection in long log sys-
                                     tems. Despite its 45% higher operating cost on an hourly basis (Table S4), most Monte
                                     Carlo parameter draws selected a swing yarder over an excavator-based yarder. Higher
                                     yarder productivity on 200 m corridors was associated with increased selection of a
                                     feller-buncher, even though the use of a feller-buncher typically increased chainsaw costs
                                     (Figures 2 and 4c,d,g,h and 7). The more rapid yarding allowed greater processor and
                                     loader utilization, making it more likely operating a feller-buncher with manual chainsaw
                                     bucking and a processor would be more cost effective than operating a single harvester at
Forests 2022, 13, 305                                                                                                                             10 of 16




                                   lower productivity (Figures 3 and 5b,f). With 500 m corridors, this effect reversed and har-
                                  vesters were generally preferred. Because we assumed tracked harvesters were equipped
                                  with higher capacity processing heads than those currently available on an eight-wheel
Forests 2022, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                   10 of 17
                                   harvester, tracked harvesters were more likely to be preferred at increasing stand ages due
                                   to lower chainsaw costs (Figures 2, 4c,d,g,h and 6a,b,e,f).




                                             Distribution
                               Figure 6.6.Distribution
                               Figure                         of harvest
                                                           of harvest  costscosts  resulting
                                                                              resulting   from from
                                                                                                 manual manual    chainsaw
                                                                                                           chainsaw    buckingbucking       andoffelling
                                                                                                                                  and felling     Doug- of
                               las-fir (a,b) and
                               Douglas-fir     (a,b)western   hemlock
                                                     and western         stems (e,f)
                                                                     hemlock    stems  exceeding   the weight
                                                                                         (e,f) exceeding         or diameter
                                                                                                            the weight           limits oflimits
                                                                                                                           or diameter      mechanized
                                                                                                                                                 of mecha-
                               equipment
                               nized equipmentas a function    of treeofspecies
                                                      as a function              and harvest
                                                                          tree species            equipment
                                                                                          and harvest           used. used.
                                                                                                         equipment       (c,d,g,h) indicate
                                                                                                                                (c,d,g,h)     whichwhich
                                                                                                                                           indicate   ap-
                               proach    to staffing  manual    chainsaw    work   is most   likely to  result in the   lowest
                               approach to staffing manual chainsaw work is most likely to result in the lowest cost for thinningcost for thinning   (c,g)
                               and regeneration harvests (d,h). In most cases, felling trees using mechanized equipment prior to
                               (c,g) and regeneration harvests (d,h). In most cases, felling trees using mechanized equipment prior
                               manual bucking by a member of the cable yarding crew is preferred (Sections 1, 2.1, S2, and S4).
                               to manual bucking by a member of the cable yarding crew is preferred (Sections 1, 2.1, S2 and S4).
                               Staffing bars do not reach a probability of one as chainsaw work is not always required. For exam-
                               Staffing
                               ple,       bars do trees
                                    no hemlock      not reach   a probability
                                                           exceeded   mechanizedof one   as chainsaw
                                                                                      limits  in thinningwork
                                                                                                            andisregeneration
                                                                                                                  not always required.
                                                                                                                                  harvests inFor  example,
                                                                                                                                               hemlock
                               no hemlock
                               did  not exceed trees
                                                  theexceeded
                                                       assumedmechanized
                                                                  capabilities oflimits   in thinning
                                                                                    a tracked            and regeneration harvests in hemlock did
                                                                                                 harvester.
                               not exceed the assumed capabilities of a tracked harvester.
                               Table 2. Means and 95% intervals (in parenthesis) observed across 10,000 Monte Carlo parameter
                               drawsSensitivity
                                        for thinninganalysis     of the parameters
                                                        and regeneration     harvests infor     the harvest
                                                                                             Douglas-fir    andcost   model,
                                                                                                                 western         otherTime
                                                                                                                             hemlock.    than totals
                                                                                                                                               slopeare and
                               extraction
                               PMh             distance,
                                     0 sums across           found that
                                                       all machines   in thelog  transport
                                                                              harvest    systems(Pl,kg , v, troundtrip
                                                                                                   considered          ) and
                                                                                                                 (Figure    1), equipment      operating
                                                                                                                                including trucking.
                               costs were consistently among the most influential      Douglas-
                                                                                                    parameters    (Figure 7).
                                                                                                             Western
                                                                                                                               Other influen-
                                                                                                                             Hemlock Increase
                               tial parameters  Summary
                                                      were Statistic
                                                              the eight-wheel harvester         constant and linear    cycle time  coefficients
                                                                                            fir             Hemlock            in Mean   (%)
                               (b0 , b1 )thinning
                                           and the    onset     of slope
                                                   time (total PMh0 ha ) −1   induced decline
                                                                                       36 (26–53)in productivity   (S
                                                                                                            38 (21–55)t ). While  eight-wheel
                                                                                                                                    5.1
                               harvesters       were cost
                                             thinning  expected
                                                            (US$ m −3to) be influential45to(31–68)
                                                                                             thinning because    other felling and
                                                                                                            48 (31–74)              7.1 process-
                                 regeneration    harvest time  (total PMh   0 ha −1)  115  (64–163)        153 (69–220)
                               ing machines were not considered, eight-wheel harvesters retained their influence in                33.6
                                     regeneration harvest cost (US$ m −3)              37 (30–46)           38 (31–47)
                               regeneration       harvests where feller-bunchers,           tracked harvesters,    and processors0.9 were con-
                               sidered. Chainsaw parameters had limited influence because chainsaw costs were low
                                     Both extraction distance and slope significantly impacted harvest costs (p < 0.001).
                               in thinning and equipment selection for regeneration harvests limited chainsaw costs
                               Increasing slope increased stemwise cycle times (Equation (1)), lowering productivity
                               (Figures 2, 4c,d,g,h and 6b,f).
                               (Figures 3 and 5a,b,e,f) and, therefore, increased harvest cost as more machine hours were
                               required to complete a harvest. Increasing slope from 65 to 80% decreased forwarder pay-
                               load by 56% (Figures 2k and 4k, Equation (S1)), requiring 1.8 times as many forwarder
                               turns to extract a given volume of wood. The corresponding increase in harvester hours
                               was 1.13 times. Decreased payload was thus the primary cause of increased thinning costs
                               on steeper slopes. Engine power did not limit forwarding speeds because driving speed
                               while loading is more constraining than engine power. Similarly, extracting wood from
                               500 m long corridors increased forwarding times compared to 200 m long corridors, low-
 Forests2022,
Forests  2022,13,
              13, 305
                  x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                            12 of 17 16
                                                                                                                                                  11 of




                                 Figure 7.7.The
                                 Figure        The1010   most
                                                      most         influential
                                                               influential       harvest
                                                                             harvest  costcost
                                                                                           modelmodel     parameters
                                                                                                   parameters           identified
                                                                                                                  identified         by sensitivity
                                                                                                                              by Soboľ   Sobol’ sensitivity
                                                                                                                                                     anal-
                                 ysis   for Douglas-fir
                                 analysis    for Douglas-fir(a,b) (a,b)
                                                                     and western    hemlock
                                                                            and western        (c,d) as(c,d)
                                                                                           hemlock        a function   of stand
                                                                                                               as a function   ofage  andage
                                                                                                                                  stand     harvest  type.
                                                                                                                                               and harvest
                                 Harvest    unit corridor
                                 type. Harvest                 lengthlength
                                                   unit corridor        and slope
                                                                                and influence   harvestharvest
                                                                                    slope influence        costs as wellasbut
                                                                                                                  costs        were
                                                                                                                            well butexcluded     from this
                                                                                                                                      were excluded    from
                                 analysis   as  their  effects     are displayed   in  Figures
                                 this analysis as their effects are displayed in Figures        2–5. v̅  =
                                                                                                      2–5.  yarding
                                                                                                              v =    line
                                                                                                                  yarding speed,
                                                                                                                            line  both
                                                                                                                                 speed, loaded
                                                                                                                                         both     and un-
                                                                                                                                                loaded  and
                                 loaded, or forwarding speed (Equation (2)). $ SMh −1 = operating        −  1       cost per scheduled machine hour
                                 unloaded, or forwarding speed (Equation (2)). $ SMh                          = operating cost per scheduled machine
                                 (Table S4). b0, b1, and St are stemwise cycle time coefficients (Equation (1)). Pl,kg = forwarding or yard-
                                 hour    (Table  S4).  b  , b   , and
                                 ing payload in kg (Section S1.2), 𝑃 ,
                                                        0     1        S t are stemwise   cycle
                                                                                        =power   time   coefficients
                                                                                          power of forwarder payload  (Equation   (1)). Pl,kg = forwarding
                                                                                                                              in merchantable      m3 (Pl,c,
                                 or yarding     payload      in   kg  (Section  S1.2),
                                 Table S2). troundtrip = roundtrip trucking time l,c   P       =  power
                                                                                         (Table S3).        of forwarder   payload   in merchantable      m3
                                 (Pl,c , Table S2). troundtrip = roundtrip trucking time (Table S3).
                                       Sensitivity analysis of the parameters for the harvest cost model, other than slope and
                                 4. Discussions
                                 extraction   distance, found that log transport (P̅l,kg, v̅, troundtrip) and equipment operating costs
                                 were The
                                        consistently    among
                                             harvest cost        the most
                                                             model            influential
                                                                       developed       hereparameters
                                                                                              attempts to(Figure
                                                                                                              provide  7).reasonable,
                                                                                                                             Other influential
                                                                                                                                           default  pa-pa-
                                 rameters    were the
                                 rameterizations        eight-wheel
                                                      across  a range harvester       constant
                                                                         of steep slope           andsystems.
                                                                                             harvest   linear cycle      time coefficients
                                                                                                                    However,                      0, b1)
                                                                                                                                  it relies on(bextrap-
                                 and   the from
                                 olation    onsetaoflimited
                                                      slope induced
                                                              body of decline
                                                                          results in   productivity
                                                                                    obtained             (St). While
                                                                                                 from smaller       treeseight-wheel      harvesters
                                                                                                                             on lower angle      slopes
                                 were   expected    to be influential    to thinning     because    other   felling  and
                                 (Section 2.1) and tethered harvesting equipment remains relatively new technology with      processing    machines
                                 were
                                 somenot     considered, eight-wheel
                                          manufacturers,     at least, makingharvesters
                                                                                   multiple retained
                                                                                                changestheirperinfluence
                                                                                                                  year [9].inBecause
                                                                                                                                regeneration      har-of
                                                                                                                                           all types
                                 vests
                                 harvest where   feller-bunchers,
                                            equipment    considered   tracked   harvesters,selected,
                                                                        were sometimes          and processors
                                                                                                           it appears were     considered.
                                                                                                                           likely             Chain-
                                                                                                                                  which equipment
                                 saw   parameters
                                 is most    preferred had  limited
                                                         will depend  influence    becausecost
                                                                          on operating         chainsaw      costs were low
                                                                                                    and productivity              in thinning
                                                                                                                              details              and
                                                                                                                                       of the specific
                                 equipment
                                 crew members   selection   for regeneration
                                                     and harvest       equipmentharvests
                                                                                       available.limited    chainsaw
                                                                                                     It is also   likelycosts      (Figures
                                                                                                                             that the   sizes, 2shapes,
                                                                                                                                                   and
                                 4c,d,g,h
                                 and slopes andofFigure
                                                   harvest6b,f).
                                                             units will affect which harvest systems are preferred. In particular,
                                 the proposed model relies heavily on just two studies of yarders, one of excavator-based
                                 4. Discussions
                                 yarding    on slopes less than 50% in Malaysia [51] and one of an older swing yarder operating
                                 in young     Douglas-fir
                                       The harvest           on slopes
                                                       cost model          less than
                                                                      developed         60%
                                                                                     here      [5]. In addition,
                                                                                            attempts    to providethe       diversity of
                                                                                                                        reasonable,         results
                                                                                                                                         default    pa-for
                                 harvesters [26,28,31–34,36,38]
                                 rameterizations      across a rangesuggests
                                                                          of steep no    single
                                                                                     slope        model
                                                                                              harvest      is likelyHowever,
                                                                                                        systems.      to accurately      represent
                                                                                                                                    it relies  on ex-all
                                 machines. Notably,
                                 trapolation               increasing
                                                from a limited      bodyselection
                                                                            of results  of obtained
                                                                                           tracked harvesters
                                                                                                       from smaller   at later
                                                                                                                            treesstand
                                                                                                                                  on lowerages angle
                                                                                                                                                 results
                                 from    assuming     they   are  fitted   with   larger    capacity    processing
                                 slopes (Section 2.1) and tethered harvesting equipment remains relatively new technologyheads    than    eight-wheel
                                 harvesters
                                 with          (Table S6). Withatheads
                                        some manufacturers,           least, of equalmultiple
                                                                             making      capacity,changes
                                                                                                     a wheeled  perharvester      may beall
                                                                                                                     year [9]. Because       preferred.
                                                                                                                                                types
                                        Given  observed    model     sensitivities   (Figures    2, 4c,d,g,h   and   7),
                                 of harvest equipment considered were sometimes selected, it appears likely which equip-  further  study   comparing
                                 productivity
                                 ment    is most and   operating
                                                  preferred   will costs
                                                                    depend  of excavator-based
                                                                               on operating costand    andswing      yarders details
                                                                                                              productivity      appearsoflikely     to be
                                                                                                                                             the spe-
                                 effective
                                 cific crewinmembers
                                               improving andunderstanding
                                                               harvest equipment of model      uncertainty.
                                                                                         available.   It is alsoBecause     theirthe
                                                                                                                  likely that     selection    interacts
                                                                                                                                      sizes, shapes,
                                 with yarder productivity, comparative study of wheeled harvesters, tracked harvesters, and
Forests 2022, 13, 305                                                                                           12 of 16




                        processors also seems likely to better quantify—and possibly reduce—model uncertainty.
                        Understanding harvest contractors’ reasons for selecting excavator-based yarders over
                        other options may be valuable since, for example, the potential for more cost effective
                        operation with a swing yarder is irrelevant if its more expensive purchase cannot be
                        financed. While only grapple yarding in regeneration harvests was considered here, lateral
                        yarding with chokers allows cable yarders to be used in thinning. While choker yarding is
                        higher cost (Table S4) and lower productivity [5] than grapple yarding, it may provide more
                        cost effective thinning than harvester-forwarder systems when slopes are steep enough
                        and corridors long enough.
                              More complete understanding of tethered forwarder payloads also appears important.
                        While forwarder tractive force was excluded from this study’s Monte Carlo parameter
                        draws and sensitivity analysis because it is primarily a property of the harvest unit, surface
                        conditions can affect forwarder travel speeds by a factor of two [63] and payload changes of
                        ±20% or more appear plausible. Since cut-to-length harvest systems can be cost competitive
                        with long log systems (Figures 2 and 4a,b), it appears likely that steep slope conditions exist
                        where harvester-forwarder pairs are more cost effective than cable yarder-based systems for
                        regeneration harvests. Some harvester-forwarder operators suggest this is the case [39] and
                        preferentially schedule steeper slope operations for seasons where traction is greater [9].
                              The apparent lack of loader models prevented assessment of harvest cost sensitivity
                        to loader productivity parameters and may affect sensitivity to loader costs. Since loader
                        operating costs are among the most influential parameters for long log harvest costs
                        (Figure 7b,d) and would also occur when cut-to-length systems include loaders (Figure 1a)
                        this suggests log loaders are an understudied type of harvest equipment. It follows that
                        time and motion studies to develop loader cycle time models would be valuable to the
                        completeness of harvest system models, creating an ability to quantify and prioritize
                        loader uncertainties.
                              We caution that the results presented here do not consider site, machine, or operator
                        specific uncertainty due to the confidential nature of private harvest contractors’ operating
                        costs. While contractors we work with have indicated consistency with their typical
                        cut-to-length and cable yarding costs, they have declined to share details of their unit-
                        level production targets needed for more complete model calibration. Productivities
                        reported in the literature (Table 1) sometimes differ by a factor of two or more, even for
                        apparently comparable equipment and sites, and utilization can differ by 20% or more
                        among crews [51]. Where possible, it is therefore recommended to use specific, rather than
                        generalized, parameter estimates and to consider the parameterization details discussed in
                        the Supplementary Material.
                              As with harvest cost models, growth model parameters are uncertain. However,
                        parameter uncertainty has not been expressed for the growth model used in this study and
                        we did not consider taper equation uncertainty. Tree growth and mortality is also subject
                        to future climate uncertainty as well as episodic disturbance. Broader analysis to place
                        harvest cost uncertainties into context with biotic and other abiotic uncertainties therefore
                        appears desirable.

                        5. Conclusions
                             To our knowledge, this study is the first to propose a stump to mill harvest cost model
                        enabling comparison of harvest systems across a range of tree sizes from 0–15 merchantable
                        m3 and slopes of 0–100%. While the model exhibits plausible behavior and we conducted
                        both uncertainty and sensitivity analyses, it is subject to present limits in the knowledge
                        of how tethered harvest equipment functions across tree size and slope. Therefore, the
                        choices of model form and parameter values are somewhat speculative. Consequently,
                        further study is needed to better understand the structure and parameterization of steep
                        slope harvest cost models, particularly in regards to comparative interactions between
                        harvest system types, harvest equipment types, specific machines, and operator abilities.
Forests 2022, 13, 305                                                                                                                13 of 16




                                   Since the proposed model considers only internal harvest costs for labor and equipment, its
                                   extension to external harvest costs, such as the social cost of carbon, also appears desirable.

                                   Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at https://www.mdpi.com/article/
                                   10.3390/f13020305/s1, Sections S1–S5 with Figure S1, Tables S1–S6, and spreadsheet with Miyata
                                   operating cost model parameters, resulting estimated operating costs, model parameter counts, and
                                   listing of the 68 parameters varied in Monte Carlo and Sobol’ analysis. The Supplementary Material
                                   also cites sources [78–84].
                                   Author Contributions: Conceptualization, T.W. and J.S.; methodology, T.W. and J.S.; software, T.W.;
                                   validation, T.W. and J.S.; formal analysis, T.W.; investigation, T.W.; resources, B.M.S.; data curation,
                                   T.W.; writing—original draft preparation, T.W.; writing—review and editing, T.W., J.S. and B.M.S.;
                                   visualization, T.W.; supervision, B.M.S.; project administration, B.M.S.; funding acquisition, J.S. and
                                   B.M.S. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
                                   Funding: This research was funded by the Oregon State University Graduate School and U.S.
                                   Department of Agriculture, grant number 2019-67019-29462.
                                  Data Availability Statement: Tree growth data was obtained from [18] and is available from https:
                                  //www.mkrf.forestry.ubc.ca/research/research-projects-database/ (accessed on 10 February 2022)
                                  with the permission of the University of British Columbia.
                                   Acknowledgments: We thank Preston Green (Miller Timber Services) for information on operation
                                   of tethered cut-to-length harvest systems, Ken Hoffine and Eric Parazoo (Lone Rock Resources) for
                                   information on operation on cable yarder systems, Kathy Kihara (civil engineer, retired) for describing
                                   approaches to heavy equipment maintenance and operator compensation and scheduling, and Doug
                                   Maguire (Oregon State University, emeritus) for observations on taper equation behavior when
                                   predicting felling diameters.
                                   Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the design
                                   of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or
                                   in the decision to publish the results.

References
1.    Parkatti, V.-P.; Tahvonen, O. Optimizing continuous cover and rotation forestry in mixed-species boreal forests. Can. J. For. Res.
      2020, 50, 1138–1151. [CrossRef]
2.    Fransson, P.; Franklin, O.; Lindroos, O.; Nilsson, U.; Brännström, Å. A simulation-based approach to a near-optimal thinning
      strategy: Allowing harvesting times to be determined for individual trees. Can. J. For. Res. 2019, 320–331. [CrossRef]
3.    Visser, R.; Harrill, H. Cable Yarding in North America and New Zealand: A Review of Developments and Practices. Croat. J. For.
      Eng. 2017, 38, 209–217.
4.    Lindroos, O.; Cavalli, R. Cable yarding productivity models: A systematic review over the period 2000–2011. Int. J. For. Eng. 2016,
      27, 79–94. [CrossRef]
5.    Hartley, D.S.; Han, H.-S. Effects of Alternative Silvicultural Treatments on Cable Harvesting Productivity and Cost in Western
      Washington. West. J. Appl. For. 2007, 22, 204–212. [CrossRef]
6.    Visser, R.; Stampfer, K. Expanding Ground-based Harvesting onto Steep Terrain: A Review. Croat. J. For. Eng. 2015, 36, 321–331.
7.    Holzleitner, F.; Kastner, M.; Stampfer, K.; Höller, N.; Kanzian, C. Monitoring Cable Tensile Forces of Winch-Assist Harvester and
      Forwarder Operations in Steep Terrain. Forests 2018, 9, 53. [CrossRef]
8.    Amishev, D.; Hunt, J.; Boswell, B. Best Management Practices for Winch-Assist Equipment, version 2.0.; FPInnovations: Pointe-Claire,
      QC, Canada, 2019. Available online: https://www2.bcforestsafe.org/node/3452 (accessed on 10 February 2022).
9.    Ponsse Solutions for Steep Slope Harvesting. Available online: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jz5nOIA-aSQ (accessed on
      26 August 2021).
10.   ClimbMAX Steep Slope Harvester. Available online: http://www.climbmax.co.nz/ (accessed on 27 September 2021).
11.   Remote Operated Bulldozer for Steep Slope Felling. Available online: https://remotebulldozer.com/ (accessed on 27 Septem-
      ber 2021).
12.   OR-OSHA Administrative Order 5-2003. OAR 437-007–0935. 2003. Available online: https://osha.oregon.gov/rules/final/
      Pages/division-7.aspx (accessed on 27 September 2021).
13.   Naillon, T.; Rappin, C. Best Management and Operating Practices for Steep Slope Machine Logging. Safety and Health Assessment and
      Research for Prevention (SHARP) Program; Washington State Department of Labor & Industries: Olympia, WA, USA, 2019. Available
      online: https://www.lni.wa.gov/safety-health/safety-research/ongoing-projects/logging (accessed on 10 February 2022).
14.   Bell, D.M.; Acker, S.A.; Gregory, M.J.; Davis, R.J.; Garcia, B.A. Quantifying regional trends in large live tree and snag availability
      in support of forest management. For. Ecol. Manag. 2021, 479, 118554. [CrossRef]
Forests 2022, 13, 305                                                                                                                  14 of 16




15.   Puettmann, K.; Ares, A.; Burton, J.; Dodson, E. Forest Restoration Using Variable Density Thinning: Lessons from Douglas-Fir
      Stands in Western Oregon. Forests 2016, 7, 310. [CrossRef]
16.   Barbour, R.J.; Parry, D.L. Log and Lumber Grades as Indicators of Wood Quality in 20- to 100-Year-old Douglas-Fir Trees from Thinned and
      Unthinned Stands; U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station: Portland, OR, USA, 2001.
      Available online: https://www.fs.usda.gov/treesearch/pubs/2921 (accessed on 10 February 2022).
17.   Ekholm, T. Optimal forest rotation under carbon pricing and forest damage risk. For. Policy Econ. 2020, 115, 102131. [CrossRef]
18.   Malcolm Knapp Research Forest. Influence of Spacing on Growth of Douglas-Fir, Western hemlock, and Western Red Cedar in Plantations,
      [dataset] RP 1957-05; University of British Columbia: Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2021. Available online: https://www.mkrf.forestry.
      ubc.ca/research/research-projects-database/ (accessed on 10 February 2022).
19.   Kline, J.D.; Harmon, M.E.; Spies, T.A.; Morzillo, A.T.; Pabst, R.J.; McComb, B.C.; Schnekenburger, F.; Olsen, K.A.; Csuti, B.; Vogeler,
      J.C. Evaluating carbon storage, timber harvest, and habitat possibilities for a Western Cascades (USA) forest landscape. Ecol. Appl.
      2016, 26, 2044–2059. [CrossRef]
20.   Diaz, D.; Loreno, S.; Ettl, G.; Davies, B. Tradeoffs in Timber, Carbon, and Cash Flow under Alternative Management Systems for
      Douglas-Fir in the Pacific Northwest. Forests 2018, 9, 447. [CrossRef]
21.   Oregon State University College of Forestry. OSU Elliott State Research Forest Proposal; Oregon State University College of
      Forestry: Corvallis, OR, USA, 2021. Available online: https://www.forestry.oregonstate.edu/elliott-state-forest/ (accessed on 27
      September 2021).
22.   Acuna, M.; Skinnell, J.; Evanson, T.; Mitchell, R. Bunching with a Self-levelling Feller-Buncher on Steep Terrain for Efficient Yarder
      Extraction. Croat. J. For. Eng. 2011, 23, 521–531.
23.   Amishev, D.; Evanson, T. Innovative methods for steep terrain harvesting. In Proceedings of the 43th International Symposium
      on Forestry Mechanisation: “Forest Engineering: Meeting the Needs of the Society and the Environment”, Padova, Italy, 11–14
      July 2010.
24.   Dyson, P.; Boswell, B. Winch-Assisted Feller-Buncher Equipped with a Continuous-Rotation Disc Saw: Short-Term Productivity Assessment;
      FPInnovations: Pointe-Claire, QC, Canada, 2016. Available online: https://library.fpinnovations.ca/en/permalink/fpipub40268
      (accessed on 27 September 2021).
25.   Wang, J.; Long, C.; McNeel, J. Production and cost analysis of a feller-buncher and grapple skidder in central Appalachian
      hardwood forests. For. Prod. J. Madison 2004, 54, 159–167.
26.   Eriksson, M.; Lindroos, O. Productivity of harvesters and forwarders in CTL operations in northern Sweden based on large
      follow-up datasets. Int. J. For. Eng. 2014, 25, 179–200. [CrossRef]
27.   Heisl, P. Productivity Standards for Whole-Tree and Cut-To-Length Harvesting Systems in Maine. Master’s Thesis, University of
      Maine, Orono, ME, USA, 2013.
28.   Kärhä, K.; Rönkkö, E.; Gumse, S.-I. Productivity and Cutting Costs of Thinning Harvesters. Int. J. For. Eng. 2004, 15, 43–56.
      [CrossRef]
29.   Nurminen, T.; Korpunen, H.; Uusitalo, J. Time consumption analysis of the mechanized cut-to-length harvesting system. Silva
      Fenn. 2006, 40, 346. [CrossRef]
30.   Visser, R.; Spinelli, R. Determining the shape of the productivity function for mechanized felling and felling-processing. J. For.
      Res. 2012, 17, 397–402. [CrossRef]
31.   Donald, K.; Boswell, B.; Amishev, D.; Hunt, J. Winch-Assist Harvester: Best Practices; FPInnovations: Pointe-Claire, QC, Canada,
      2018; Available online: https://library.fpinnovations.ca/en/permalink/fpipub52594 (accessed on 27 September 2021).
32.   Drews, E.S.; Hartsough, B.R.; Doyal, J.A.; Kellogg, L.D. Harvester-Forwarder and Harvester-Yarder Systems for Fuel Reduction
      Treatments. J. For. Eng. 2001, 12, 81–91. [CrossRef]
33.   Dyson, P.; Strimbu, V. Assessments of a Winch-Assisted John Deere Harvester and Forwarder; FPInnovations: Pointe-Claire, QC,
      Canada, 2017. Available online: https://library.fpinnovations.ca/en/permalink/fpipub49568 (accessed on 27 September 2021).
34.   Green, P.Q.; Chung, W.; Leshchinsky, B.; Belart, F.; Sessions, J.; Fitzgerald, S.A.; Wimer, J.A.; Cushing, T.; Garland, J.J. Insight into
      the Productivity, Cost and Soil Impacts of Cable-assisted Harvester-forwarder Thinning in Western Oregon. For. Sci. 2020, 66,
      82–96. [CrossRef]
35.   Holzleitner, F.; Stampfer, K.; Visser, R. Utilization Rates and Cost Factors in Timber Harvesting Based on Long-term Machine
      Data. Croat. J. For. Eng. 2011, 32, 501–508. Available online: https://hrcak.srce.hr/72653 (accessed on 10 February 2022).
36.   Petitmermet, J.; Sessions, J.; Bailey, J.; Zamora-Cristales, R. Cost and Productivity of Tethered Cut-to-Length Systems in a
      Dry-Forest Fuel-Reduction Treatment: A Case Study. For. Sci. 2019, 65, 581–592. [CrossRef]
37.   Strandgard, M.; Alam, M.; Mitchell, R. Impact of Slope on Productivity of a Self-levelling Processor. Croat. J. For. Eng. 2014, 32,
      193–200.
38.   Ghaffariyan, M.R.; Acuna, M.; Brown, M.W. Machine productivity evaluation for harvesters and forwarders in thinning operations
      in Australia. Silva Balc. 2019, 20, 13–25. [CrossRef]
39.   Mattioda, M. CTL Cable-assisted Harvesting. In Proceedings of the 2020 Spring Conference and Workshop; California Licensed
      Foresters Association, Anderson, CA, USA, 6–7 March 2020.
40.   Uffelman, S. The Impact of Understory Vegetation on the Productivity and Costs of Cut-to-length Thinning Harvest Systems in
      the Pacific Northwest. Master’s Thesis, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA, 2019.
Forests 2022, 13, 305                                                                                                                 15 of 16




41.   Renzie, C.; Han, H.-S. Harvesting Productivity and Cost of Clearcut and Partial Cut in Interior British Columbia, Canada. J. For.
      Environ. Sci. 2008, 24, 1–14. Available online: https://www.koreascience.or.kr/article/JAKO200822350101567.page (accessed on
      27 September 2021).
42.   Jourgholami, M.; Majnounian, B.; Zargham, N. Performance, Capability and Costs of Motor-Manual Tree Felling in Hyrcanian
      Hardwood Forest. Croat. J. For. Eng. 2013, 34, 283–293. Available online: https://hrcak.srce.hr/116784 (accessed on 27
      September 2021).
43.   Jukes, W.D. Estimating Harvesting Productivity and Cost on Second-Growth Coastal Sites in British Columbia. Master’s Thesis,
      University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 1995.
44.   Gagliardi, K.; Ackerman, S.; Ackerman, P. Multi-Product Forwarder-Based Timber Extraction: Time Consumption and Productiv-
      ity Analysis of Two Forwarder Models Over Multiple Products and Extraction Distances. Croat. J. For. Eng. 2020, 41, 231–242.
      [CrossRef]
45.   Adebayo, A.B.; Han, H.-S.; Johnson, L. Productivity and cost of cut-to-length and whole-tree harvesting in a mixed-conifer stand.
      For. Prod. J. 2007, 57, 59–69.
46.   Ghaffariyan, M.R.; Sessions, J.; Brown, M. Machine productivity and residual harvesting residues associated with a cut-to-length
      harvest system in southern Tasmania. South. For. J. For. Sci. 2012, 74, 229–235. [CrossRef]
47.   Hildt, E.; Leszczuk, A.; Mac Donagh, P.; Schlichter, T. Time Consumption Analysis of Forwarder Activities in Thinning. Croat. J.
      For. Eng. 2020, 41, 13–24. [CrossRef]
48.   Strandgard, M.; Mitchell, R.; Acuna, M. Time consumption and productivity of a forwarder operating on a slope in a cut-to-length
      harvest system in a Pinus radiata D. Don pine plantation. J. For. Sci. 2017, 63, 324–330. [CrossRef]
49.   Akay, A.E.; Erdas, O.; Sessions, J. Determining Productivity of Mechanized Harvesting Machines. J. Appl. Sci. 2003, 4, 100–105.
      [CrossRef]
50.   Donald, K.; Boswell, B.; Amishev, D.; Hunt, J. Winch-Assist Forwarder: Best Practices; FPInnovations: Pointe-Claire, QC, Canada,
      2018. Available online: https://library.fpinnovations.ca/en/permalink/fpipub52697 (accessed on 27 September 2021).
51.   Engelbrecht, R.; McEwan, A.; Spinelli, R. A Robust Productivity Model for Grapple Yarding in Fast-Growing Tree Plantations.
      Forests 2017, 8, 396. [CrossRef]
52.   Howard, A.F.; Rutherford, D.; Young, G.G. The Productivity and Cost of Partial and Clear Cutting with Two Cable Yarding Systems
      in Second-Growth Forests of Coastal British Columbia; Natural Resources Canada: Victoria, BC, Canada, 1996. Available online:
      https://scf.rncan.gc.ca/publications?id=4331 (accessed on 27 September 2021).
53.   Spinelli, R.; Marchi, E.; Visser, R.; Harrill, H.; Gallo, R.; Cambi, M.; Neri, F.; Lombardini, C.; Magagnotti, N. The effect of carriage
      type on yarding productivity and cost. Int. J. For. Eng. 2017, 28, 34–41. [CrossRef]
54.   Medved, M.; Olgris, N.; Klun, J.; Košir, B.; Vončina, R. Koledarski čas in učinki dela z žičnimi napravami Syncrofalke na
      Tolminskem. Zb. Gozdarstva Lesar. 2005, 77, 113–142. Available online: https://www.forestry.bf.uni-lj.si/kazalo77.htm (accessed
      on 8 August 2021).
55.   Stampfer, K.; Visser, R.; Kanzian, C. Cable Corridor Installation Times for European Yarders. Int. J. For. Eng. 2006, 17, 71–77.
      [CrossRef]
56.   Kellogg, L.D.; Miller, M.; Olsen, E. Skyline Thinning Production and Costs: Experience from the Willamette Young Stand Projects; Oregon
      State University: Corvallis, OR, USA, 1999. Available online: https://ir.library.oregonstate.edu/concern/technical_reports/6q1
      82q69g (accessed on 23 August 2021).
57.   Tolan, A.; Visser, R. The effect of the number of log sorts on mechanized log processing productivity and value recovery. Int. J.
      For. Eng. 2015, 26, 36–47. [CrossRef]
58.   Mousavi, R.; Naghdi, R. Time consumption and productivity analysis of timber trucking using two kinds of trucks in northern
      Iran. J. For. Sci. 2013, 59, 211–221. [CrossRef]
59.   Mason, C.L.; Casavant, K.L.; Lippke, B.R.; Nguyen, D.K.; Jessup, E. The Washington Log Trucking Industry: Costs and Safety Analysis;
      The Rural Technology Initiative and the Transportation Research Group, Washington State University: Seattle, WA, USA, 2008.
      Available online: https://www.ruraltech.org/pubs/reports/2008/log_trucks/ (accessed on 30 August 2021).
60.   Han, S.-K.; Murphy, G. Trucking Productivity and Costing Model for Transportation of Recovered Wood Waste in Oregon. For.
      Prod. J. 2011, 61, 552–560. [CrossRef]
61.   Ghaffariyan, M.R. Reviewing productivity studies of skidders working in coniferous forests and plantations. Silva Balc. 2020, 21,
      83–98. [CrossRef]
62.   Strimbu, V.; Boswell, B. Adverse Skidding Using a Tigercat 635E Assisted by a T-Winch 10.1; FPInnovations: Pointe-Claire, QC,
      Canada, 2018. Available online: https://library.fpinnovations.ca/en/permalink/fpipub49844 (accessed on 27 September 2021).
63.   Proto, A.R.; Macrì, G.; Visser, R.; Harrill, H.; Russo, D.; Zimbalatti, G. Factors affecting forwarder productivity. Eur. J. For. Res.
      2018, 137, 143–151. [CrossRef]
64.   Miles, P.D.; Smith, B.W. Specific Gravity and Other Properties of Wood and Bark for 156 Tree Species Found in North America; U.S.
      Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Northern Research Station: Newtown Square, PA, USA, 2009. Available online:
      https://www.fs.usda.gov/treesearch/pubs/34185 (accessed on 30 August 2021).
65.   Murphy, G.; Acuna, M. Effect of harvesting season, system and equipment on in-forest Pinus radiata bark removal in Australia
      and New Zealand. Int. J. For. Eng. 2017, 28, 10–17. [CrossRef]
Forests 2022, 13, 305                                                                                                              16 of 16




66.   Miyata, E.S. Determining Fixed and Operating Costs of Logging Equipment; U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, North
      Central Forest Experiment Station: St. Paul, MN, USA, 1980. Available online: https://www.fs.usda.gov/treesearch/pubs/10120
      (accessed on 27 September 2021).
67.   Uusitalo, L.; Lehikoinen, A.; Helle, I.; Myrberg, K. An overview of methods to evaluate uncertainty of deterministic models in
      decision support. Environ. Model. Softw. 2015, 63, 24–31. [CrossRef]
68.   Puy, A.; Lo Piano, S.; Saltelli, A.; Levin, S.A. Sensobol: Computation of Variance-Based Sensitivity Indices. arXiv 2021, arXiv:
      2101.10103.
69.   Puy, A.; Becker, W.; Lo Piano, S.; Saltelli, A. A comprehensive comparison of total-order estimators for global sensitivity analysis.
      Int. J. Uncertainity 2021, 12, 1–18. [CrossRef]
70.   Hann, D.W.; Marshall, D.D.; Hanus, M.L. Equations for Predicting Height-to-Crown-Base, 5-Year Diameter-Growth Rate, 5-Year
      Height-Growth Rate, 5-Year Mortality Rate, and Maximum Size-Density Trajectory for Douglas-fir and Western Hemlock in the Coastal
      Region of the Pacific Northwest; Research Contribution 40, Forest Research Laboratory Oregon State University: Corvallis, OR,
      USA, 2003. Available online: https://ir.library.oregonstate.edu/concern/technical_reports/jd472$\times$893 (accessed on 22
      December 2021).
71.   Weiskittel, A.R.; Hann, D.W.; Kershaw, J.A.; Vanclay, J.K. Forest Growth and Yield Modeling; Wiley-Blackwell: Chichester, UK, 2011;
      ISBN 978-0-470-66500-8.
72.   Poudel, K.P.; Temesgen, H.; Gray, A.N. Estimating upper stem diameters and volume of Douglas-fir and Western hemlock trees
      in the Pacific northwest. For. Ecosyst. 2018, 5, 16. [CrossRef]
73.   Maguire, D.A.; Hann, D.W. Bark Thickness and Bark Volume in Southwestern Oregon Douglas-Fir. West. J. Appl. For. 1990, 5, 5–8.
      [CrossRef]
74.   Murphy, G.; Pilkerton, S.J. Seasonal Impacts on Bark Loss for Douglas-fir and Ponderosa Pine Harvested on the Pacific Northwest
      Coast of the USA. Int. J. For. Eng. 2011, 22, 35–41. [CrossRef]
75.   Chang, S.J. Twenty one years after the publication of the generalized Faustmann formula. For. Policy Econ. 2020, 118, 102238.
      [CrossRef]
76.   Department of Natural Resources. WA DNR Log Prices; Washington Department of Natural Resources: Washington, DC, USA,
      2021. Available online: https://www.dnr.wa.gov/programs-and-services/product-sales-and-leasing/timber-sales/timber-sale-
      querylog-prices (accessed on 13 January 2022).
77.   Nalle, D.J.; Montgomery, C.A.; Arthur, J.L.; Polasky, S.; Schumaker, N.H. Modeling joint production of wildlife and timber.
      J. Environ. Econ. Manag. 2004, 48, 997–1017. [CrossRef]
78.   Baek, K. Productivity and Cost of a Cut-to-Length Commercial Thinning Operation in a Northern California Redwood Forest.
      Master’s Thesis, Humboldt State University, Arcata, CA, USA, 2018.
79.   Fonseca, M. Measurement of Roundwood: Methodologies and Conversion Ratios; United Nations Economic Commission for Europe,
      Trade and Timber Branch: Geneva, Switzerland, 2005; ISBN 978-0-85199-079-8.
80.   EIA. Weekly Retail Gasoline and Diesel Prices and Refiner Petroleum Product Prices by Sales Type; [dataset]; United States Energy
      Information Administration: Washington, DC, USA, 2021. Available online: https://www.eia.gov/petroleum/ (accessed on 27
      September 2021).
81.   BLS. PPI Commodity Data for Final Demand, Not Seasonally Adjusted; Bureau of Labor Statistics: Washington, DC, USA, 2021.
      Available online: https://data.bls.gov/cgi-bin/surveymost?bls (accessed on 8 November 2021).
82.   Spinelli, R.; Magagnotti, N.; Picchi, G. Annual use, economic life and residual value of cut-to-length harvesting machines. J. For.
      Econ. 2011, 17, 378–387. [CrossRef]
83.   Spinelli, R.; Visser, R. Analyzing and Estimating Delays in Harvester Operations. Int. J. For. Eng. 2008, 19, 36–41. [CrossRef]
84.   Sessions, J.; Berry, M.; Sup-Han, H. Machine Rate Estimates and Equipment Utilization: A Modified Approach. Croat. J. For. Eng.
      2021, 42, 437–443. [CrossRef]
