United States
Department of
Agriculture
                    Levels-of-Growing-Stock Cooperative
Forest Service      Study in Douglas-fir:
Pacific Northwest
Research Station    Report No. 15–Hoskins: 1963–1998
Research Paper
PNW-RP-537
March 2002          David D. Marshall and Robert O. Curtis
             Levels-of-growing-stock study treatment schedule, showing percentage of gross basal
             area increment of control plots to be retained in growing stock

                                                           Treatment
             Thinning        1         2         3         4         5         6         7          8
             First           10        10       30        30        50        50        70          70
             Second          10        20       30        40        50        40        70          60
             Third           10        30       30        50        50        30        70          50
             Fourth          10        40       30        60        50        20        70          40
             Fifth           10        50       30        70        50        10        70          30


Background   Public and private agencies are cooperating in a study of eight thinning regimes in
             young Douglas-fir stands. Regimes differ in the amount of basal area allowed to accrue
             in growing stock at each successive thinning. All regimes start with a common level of
             growing stock established by a conditioning thinning.

             Thinning interval is controlled by height growth of crop trees, and a single type of
             thinning is prescribed.

             Nine study areas, each involving three completely random replications of each thinning
             regime and an unthinned control, have been established in western Oregon and
             Washington, U.S.A., and on Vancouver Island, British Columbia, Canada. Site quality of
             these areas ranges from II through IV.

             This is a progress report on this cooperative study.
Levels-of-Growing-Stock
Cooperative Study in
Douglas-Fir:

Report No. 15–Hoskins:
1963–1998
David D. Marshall, Research Forester
Robert O. Curtis, Scientist Emeritus

Pacific Northwest Research Station
Forestry Sciences Laboratory
Olympia, Washington




Research Paper PNW-RP-537
U.S. Department of Agriculture
Forest Service
Pacific Northwest Research Station
Portland, Oregon
March 2002
Abstract   Marshall, David D.; Curtis, Robert O. 2001. Levels-of-growing-stock cooperative study
              in Douglas-fir: report no.15-Hoskins: 1963–1998. Res. Pap. PNW-RP-537. Portland, OR:
              U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station.
              80 p.
           The cooperative levels-of-growing-stock (LOGS) study in Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga
           menziesii (Mirb.) Franco) was begun to study the relations between growing stock, growth,
           cumulative wood production, and tree size in repeatedly thinned stands. This report
           summarizes results from the Hoskins installation through age 55. Growing stock has
           been allowed to accumulate for 19 years since the last treatment thinning was applied in
           this high site class II natural stand. Volume and diameter growth were strongly related to
           growing stock. Basal area growth-growing stock relations were considerably weaker.
           Differences in tree size and volume distribution were considerable. Culmination of mean
           annual increment has not occurred for any of the treatments, although the control has
           culminated for total stem cubic volume and is near culmination for merchantable cubic
           volume. Only small differences are seen in growth percentages between thinning treatments.
           Results demonstrate potential flexibility in managing Douglas-fir to reach a range of
           objectives.

           Keywords: Thinning, growing stock, growth and yield, stand density, Douglas-fir,
           Pseudotsuga menziesii, series-Douglas-fir LOGS.

Summary    The cooperative levels-of-growing-stock (LOGS) study in Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga
           menziesii (Mirb.) Franco) was begun in the early 1960s to study the relations between
           growing stock, growth, cumulative wood production, and tree size in repeatedly thinned
           stands. This report summarizes results for the LOGS installation most advanced in
           development–the Hoskins installation in the Oregon Coast Range–through age 55 (19
           years after the last thinning treatment was applied). The stand is of natural origin with an
           estimated site index of 134 feet (site class II). Site index and height growth trends have
           been stable on the control plots since about age 27, and estimated site index on thinned
           treatments has increased an average of about 15 feet since the initial cut. Volume and
           diameter growth were strongly related to growing stock; basal area less so. Relative
           growth (growth percentage) has remained similar among the thinning treatments to date.
           Substantial mortality in the controls has reduced their net growth. The lighter thinning
           treatments have produced volumes similar to the controls as growing stock has
           accumulated after the last treatment thinning. The different levels of growing stock have
           produced marked differences in tree size distribution. Although net total stem volume
           mean annual increment apparently has culminated on the controls, merchantable volume
           has not. Culmination has not been reached on any of the thinning treatments. Past results
           from the LOGS studies have generally been consistent with varying rates of development
           by site class. Thus, these results may indicate the expected future development of other
           LOGS installations. Results demonstrate tradeoffs between managing for tree size and
           production in short rotations but suggest potential advantages in wood production and
           other benefits from extended rotations and accumulation of growing stock.
Other LOGS (Levels-   Williamson, Richard L.; Staebler, George R. 1965. A cooperative level-of-growing-stock
of-Growing-Stock)         study in Douglas-fir. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service,
Reports                   Pacific Northwest Forest and Range Experiment Station. 12 p.

                      Describes purpose and scope of a cooperative study investigating the relative merits of
                      eight different thinning regimes. Main features of six study areas installed since 1961 in
                      young stands also are summarized.

                      Williamson, Richard L.; Staebler, George R. 1971. Levels-of-growing-stock coopera-
                          tive study on Douglas-fir: report no. 1–Description of study and existing study areas.
                          Res. Pap. PNW-111. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service,
                          Pacific Northwest Forest and Range Experiment Station. 12 p.

                      Thinning regimes in young Douglas-fir stands are described. Some characteristics of
                      individual study areas established by cooperating public and private agencies are
                      discussed.

                      Bell, John F.; Berg, Alan B. 1972. Levels-of-growing stock cooperative study on
                          Douglas-fir: report no. 2–The Hoskins study, 1963-70. Res. Pap. PNW-130. Portland,
                          OR; U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Forest and
                          Range Experiment Station. 19 p.

                      A calibration thinning and the first treatment thinning in a 20-year-old Douglas-fir stand at
                      Hoskins, Oregon, are described. Growth for the first 7 years after thinning was greater
                      than expected.

                      Diggle, P.K. 1972. The levels-of-growing-stock cooperative study in Douglas-fir in British
                         Columbia (report no. 3–Cooperative L.O.G.S. study series). Inf. Rep. BC-X-66,
                         Victoria, BC: Canadian Forestry Service, Pacific Forest Research Centre. 46 p.

                      Describes the establishment and installation of the two LOGS studies established on
                      Vancouver Island at Shawnigan Lake and Sayward Forest.

                      Williamson, Richard L. 1976. Levels-of-growing-stock cooperative study in Douglas-fir:
                          report no. 4–Rocky Brook, Stampede Creek, and Iron Creek. Res. Pap. PNW-210.
                          Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest
                          Forest and Range Experiment Station. 39 p.

                      The USDA Forest Service maintains three of nine installations in a regional, cooperative
                      study of influences of levels of growing stock (LOGS) on stand growth. The effects of
                      calibration thinnings are described for the three areas. Results of first treatment thinning
                      are described for one area.

                      Berg, Alan B.; Bell, John F. 1979. Levels-of-growing-stock cooperative study on
                         Douglas-fir: report no. 5–The Hoskins study, 1963-75. Res. Pap. PNW-257. Portland,
                         OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Forest and
                         Range Experiment Station. 29 p.
Growth data are presented for the first 12 years of management of young Douglas-fir
growing at eight levels of growing stock. The second and third treatment periods are
described.

Young Douglas-fir stands transfer growth from many to few trees. Some of the
treatments have the potential to equal the gross cubic-foot volume of the controls during
the next treatment periods.

Arnott, J.T.; Beddows, D. 1981. Levels-of-growing-stock cooperative study in Douglas-
   fir: report no. 6–Sayward Forest, Shawnigan Lake. Inf. Rep. BC-X-223. Victoria, BC:
   Canadian Forestry Service, Pacific Forest Research Centre. 54 p.

Data are presented for the first 8 and 6 years at Sayward Forest and Shawnigan Lake,
respectively. The effects of the calibration thinnings are described for these two
installations on Vancouver Island, British Columbia. Results of the first treatment
thinning at Sayward Forest for a 4-year response period also are included.

Tappeiner, John C.; Bell, John F.; Brodie, J. Douglas. 1982. Response of young
   Douglas-fir to 16 years of intensive thinning. Res. Bull. 38. Corvallis, OR: Forest
   Research Laboratory, School of Forestry, Oregon State University. 17 p.

Williamson, Richard L.; Curtis, Robert O. 1984. Levels-of-growing-stock cooperative
    study in Douglas-fir: report no. 7–Preliminary results; Stampede Creek, and some
    comparisons with Iron Creek and Hoskins. Res. Pap. PNW-323. Portland, OR: U.S.
    Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Forest and Range
    Experiment Station. 42 p.

Results of the Stampede Creek LOGS study in southwest Oregon are summarized
through the first treatment period, and results are compared with two more advanced
LOGS studies and are generally similar.

Curtis, Robert O.; Marshall, David D. 1986. Levels-of-growing-stock cooperative study
in Douglas-fir; report no. 8–The LOGS study: twenty-year results. Res. Pap. PNW-356.
Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest
Research Station. 113 p.

Reviews history and status of LOGS study and provides new analyses of data, primarily
from the site II installations. Growth is strongly related to growing stock. Thinning
treatments have produced marked differences in volume distribution by tree size. At the
fourth treatment period, current annual increment is still about double mean annual
increment. Differences among treatments are increasing rapidly. There are considerable
differences in productivity among installations, beyond those accounted for by site
differences. The LOGS study design is evaluated.

Curtis, Robert O. 1987. Levels-of-growing-stock cooperative study in Douglas-fir: report
   no. 9–Some comparisons of DFSIM estimates with growth in the levels-of-growing-
   stock study. Res. Pap. PNW-RP-376. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture,
   Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. 34 p.
Initial stand statistics for the LOGS study installations were projected by the DFSIM
simulation program over the available periods of observation. Estimates were compared
with observed volume and basal area growth, diameter change, and mortality. Overall
agreement was reasonably good, although results indicate some biases and a need for
revisions in the DFSIM program.

Marshall, David D.; Bell, John F.; Tappeiner, John C. 1992. Levels-of-growing-stock
   cooperative study in Douglas-fir: report no. 10–The Hoskins study, 1963-83. Res.
   Pap. PNW-RP-448. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service,
   Pacific Northwest Research Station. 65 p.

Results of the Hoskins study are summarized through the fifth and final planned
treatment period. To age 40, thinnings in this low site I stand resulted in large increases
in diameter growth with reductions in basal area and cubic volume growth and yield.
Growth was strongly related to level of growing stock. All treatments are still far from
culmination of mean annual increment in cubic feet.

Curtis, Robert O. 1992. Levels-of-growing-stock cooperative study in Douglas-fir: report
   no. 11–Stampede Creek: a 20-year progress report. Res. Pap. PNW-RP-442.
   Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest
   Research Station. 47 p.

Results of the first 20 years of the Stampede Creek study in southwest Oregon are
summarized. To age 53, growth in this site III Douglas-fir stand has been strongly related
to level of growing stock. Marked differences in volume distribution by tree sizes are
developing as a result of thinning. Periodic annual increment is about twice mean annual
increment in all treatments, indicating that the stand is still far from culmination.

Curtis, Robert O. 1994. Levels-of-growing-stock cooperative study in Douglas-fir: report
   no. 12–The Iron Creek study: 1966-89. Res. Pap. PNW-RP-475. Portland, OR: U.S.
   Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. 67 p.

Results of the Iron Creek study in the Gifford Pinchot National Forest, southern
Washington, are summarized through age 42 (completion of the 60 feet of height growth
comprising the planned course of the experiment). Volume growth of this mid-site II
plantation has been strongly related to growing stock; basal area growth much less so.
Different growing-stock levels have produced marked differences in the size distribution
and in crown dimension. Periodic annual volume increment at age 42 is two to three
times mean annual increment in all treatments.

Hoyer, Gerald E.; Andersen, Norman A.; Marshall, David D. 1996. Levels-of-growing-
   stock cooperative study in Douglas-fir: report no. 13–The Francis study: 1963-90.
   Res. Pap. PNW-RP-488. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest
   Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. 91 p.

Results of the Francis study, begun at age 15, are summarized together with results
from additional first-thinning treatments started at age 25. To age 42, total cubic-foot
volume growth on this mid-site II plantation has been strongly related to level of growing
stock. Close dollar values among several alternatives suggest that diverse stand structure
objectives can be attained at age 42 with little difference in wood product-value per acre.

Curtis, Robert O.; Marshall, David D.; Bell, John F. 1997. LOGS: a pioneering example
   of silvicultural research in coast Douglas-fir. Journal of Forestry. 95(7): 19-25.

Provides a general overview of the LOGS cooperative and presents the major results to
date.

Curtis, Robert O.; Marshall, David D. 2001. Levels-of-growing-stock cooperative study
   in Douglas-fir: report no. 14–Stampede Creek. Res. Pap. PNW-RP-543. Portland, OR:
   U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station.
   77 p.

Results of the Stampede Creek study are summarized from establishment at total age
33 through the final planned treatment period at age 63 in a estimated site class III stand
in southwest Oregon. Results to date are generally similar to the higher site LOGS
installations, although development is slower. Volume growth is strongly related to growing
stock, but basal area growth is weaker. Thinning has resulted in marked differences in
tree size distribution and periodic annual increment is still two to three times greater
than mean annual increment.
Contents   1    Introduction

           2    Objectives

           2    Methods

           2    Description of Study Area

           3    Experimental Design

           4    Stand Treatments

           7    Data Collection and Summarization

           8    Analyses

           9    Results

           9    Live Stand Development

           18   Cumulative Volume Production

           21   Volume Distribution by Tree and Log Size Classes

           22   Periodic and Mean Annual Increments

           36   Growth Percentage

           39   Discussion

           39   Stand Development

           39   Basal Area Growth

           40   Volume Growth

           40   Diameter Growth

           40   Mean Annual Increment

           41   Cumulative Volume and Tree Size

           42   Growth Percentage
43   Management Implications

43   Benefits of Thinning

44   Rotations and Timing of Final Thinnings

44   Evaluation of the Study

45   Metric Equivalents

45   Literature Cited

47   Appendix
               Figure 1—Locations of the nine installations of the levels-of-growing-stock
               cooperative study in Douglas-fir.


Introduction   The Hoskins levels-of-growing-stock (LOGS) installation is one of nine installations in a
               regional thinning study established in young Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii (Mirb.)
               Franco) stands according to a common work plan (Curtis and others 1997, Williamson
               and Staebler 1971) (fig. 1). This study is a cooperative effort involving the Canadian
               Forest Service, the British Columbia Ministry of Forests, Oregon State University, USDA
               Forest Service, Washington State Department of Natural Resources, and Weyerhaeuser
               Company. The objective of the study is to compare growth-growing stock relations,
               cumulative wood production, and tree size development under eight thinning regimes
               begun before the onset of severe competition and differing in the amount of growing
               stock they retain after thinning. The original study plan was developed at Weyerhaeuser
               Company, Centralia, Washington. Procedural details were developed by the Pacific
               Northwest Research Station, USDA Forest Service, Portland, Oregon.

               Detailed progress reports on individual installations (fig. 1) are contained in the series of
               LOGS publications listed at the beginning of this report. Curtis and Marshall (1986) give
               an overall summary of results for the first 20 years of the study. To date, all but two of
               the lowest productivity site installations have completed the prescribed treatment
               schedules and have been put on a maintenance remeasurement schedule.



                                                                                                           1
                            The Hoskins LOGS study was established in 1963 by Oregon State University in
                            western Oregon on lands owned by Starker Forests of Corvallis, Oregon, and is the
                            most developed of the LOGS installations. Intermediate results for this installation were
                            reported by Bell and Berg (1972) for the calibration (1963-66) and the first treatment
                            (1966-70) periods, Berg and Bell (1979) for the second (1970-73) and third (1973-75)
                            treatment periods, Tappeiner and others (1982) for the fourth treatment period (1975-79),
                            and Marshall and others (1992) for the fifth and final treatment period (1979-83). This
                            report provides an update for the Hoskins installation to 1998 (stand age 55), including
                            development over the 15 years since the final treatment period (Marshall and others
                            1992) and 19 years since the final thinning in 1979.

Objectives                  The LOGS cooperative studies evolved from work in the late 1950s by George Staebler
                            (1959, 1960). Staebler argued that thinning would transfer increment to the remaining
                            faster growing trees and increase relative growth (or growth percentage) through reduction
                            of growing stock, while largely eliminating mortality losses. He also recognized that the
                            implied assumption of near-constant gross increment over a wide range of stocking had
                            not been tested. The objectives of the LOGS studies, as stated in the 1962 plan,1 were
                            “to determine how the amount of growing stock retained in repeatedly thinned stands for
                            Douglas-fir affects cumulative wood production, tree size, and growth-growing stock
                            ratios.” Treatments were designed to include a wide range of growing stock so that the
                            results would show “how to produce any combination of factors deemed optimum from a
                            management standpoint.” The study was not designed as a test of specific operational
                            thinning regimes but was intended to define the quantitative relation between growth and
                            growing stock for a closely controlled initial stand condition and kind of thinning.

Methods                     The Hoskins LOGS study was established in a uniform, even-aged 20-year-old Douglas-
Description of Study Area   fir stand that had regenerated naturally after wildfire in the Oregon Coast Range. The
                            stand is near Hoskins, Oregon (fig. 2), about 22 mi west of Corvallis (fig. 2) in Benton
                            County (sec. 27 of T. 10 S., R. 7 W., Willamette Meridian). The breast height age, based
                            on boring 54 trees (two per plot) during plot establishment in 1963, was 13 years. On the
                            unthinned control plots, the initial number of trees ranged from 1,610 to 1,885 per acre,
                            initial basal area from 120 to 160 ft2 per acre, and initial average diameter from 3.6 to
                            4.2 in. Heights-to-live-crown were uniform and near 8 ft at the time of plot establishment,
                            and crown ratios were about 80 percent. All trees in the plots were Douglas-fir.

                            Annual precipitation in the area is about 65 to 75 in and falls primarily as rain. The
                            temperature averages 50 °F with 160 to 190 frost-free days per year (Knezevich 1975).

                            The soils are described by Knezevich (1975) as deep, well-drained silty clay loams of
                            the Apt series that formed in colluvium from mixed sedimentary and igneous rocks. The
                            surface layer is about 10 in thick and a very dark grayish-brown silty clay loam. The
                            subsoil is about 60 in deep and a dark brown, dark yellowish-brown, or strong brown silty
                            clay and clay. The water-holding capacity ranges from 7 to 10 in. Slopes range from 10
                            to 40 percent on a southerly aspect at an elevation of about 1,000 ft on the upper one-
                            third of the slope.

                            1
                             Staebler, G.R.; Williamson, R.L. 1962. Plan for a level-of-growing-stock
                            study in Douglas-fir. Unpublished study plan. On file with: Forestry
                            Sciences Laboratory, 3625-93rd Avenue SW, Olympia, WA 98512.




2
                      Figure 2—Location of the Hoskins levels-of-growing-stock installation.


                      Initially there was no understory vegetation in the area due to the dense overstory. The
                      thinned plots have since developed a range in amount and species present in the under-
                      story. Major species present in the thinned plots include sword-fern (Polystichum munitum
                      (Kaulf.) Presl) and salal (Gaultheria shallon Pursh) on the lighter thinning treatments,
                      ocean-spray (Holodiscus discolor (Pursh) Maxim) in the intermediate densities, and
                      hazel (Corylus cornuta var. californica (DC.) Sharp) on the most heavily thinned (lowest
                      density) plots. Since the early 1990s, the control plots have developed a small amount
                      of understory. The climax plant association is Tsuga/Gaultheria/Polystichum (Franklin
                      1979).

                      The estimated site index, based on the controls, is about 134 ft at 50 yr breast height
                      age, or a high site class II according to King (1966).

Experimental Design   This experiment compares eight thinning treatments, designed to achieve a wide range
                      in growing stock. Each of the eight treatments and an unthinned control are replicated
                      three times on 27 1/5-acre square sample plots in a completely randomized design (fig. 3).
                      The experiment consists of five periodic thinnings in each treatment in a split-plot-in-
                      time or repeated-measures design. The experiment was designed to last for five treatment
                      periods after an initial calibration period. The final treatment period was completed at
                      Hoskins after the 1983 growing season.




                                                                                                                3
                   Figure 3—Arrangement of plots in the Hoskins LOGS installation.


                   The criteria for initial stand selection were:

                   1. A high degree of uniformity in stocking and site quality over an area sufficient to
                      accommodate the approximately 9-acre installation.
                   2. Stand 20 to 40 ft in top height.
                   3. Stand vigorous and of density such that individual tree development had not been
                      strongly influenced by competition, as evidenced by live crown extending over most
                      of the bole.
                   4. At least 80 percent of the basal area in Douglas-fir.
                   The Hoskins installation met all these criteria, although not all the plots are contiguous.
                   Because of space limitations, five plots had to be located on closely adjacent but
                   similar areas. Buffer strips were maintained around the installation but not between
                   plots.

Stand Treatments   The prescribed treatments were rigidly controlled to provide for compatibility among
                   installations on different sites.

                   Selection of crop trees—Crop trees were selected before the initial calibration thinning
                   at a rate of 16 per plot (80 per acre). These trees were well formed and vigorous, with at
                   least 13.5 ft between adjacent crop trees and four crop trees on each plot quarter. Crop
                   trees were numbered 1 through 16 and painted with a white ring at breast height to
                   distinguish them from noncrop trees, which were painted with other colors representing
                   the treatments. The study plan called for crop trees to be retained on the treated plots
                   until all noncrop trees had been cut. This was not necessarily the case, as will be
                   discussed below under the description of the thinning treatments.

                   Calibration thinning—All 24 plots assigned to receive thinning treatments also
                   received a calibration or preparatory thinning. This initial thinning was intended to reduce
                   the variation in the original growing stock and allow the trees time to adjust, thereby
                   resulting in more uniform growth potential for all the treated plots (see Marshall and
                   others 1992 for more discussion on the results of the calibration thinning).


4
The study plan called for stands to be thinned to an initial spacing based on the D+ rule
(Smith and others 1997: 125) as follows:

                                    S = 0.6167*D + 8 ,

where S is the average square spacing in feet and D is the quadratic mean d.b.h.
(diameter at breast height), in inches, of the remaining trees. The calibration thinning
was controlled by the specifications that the average d.b.h. of the leave trees be within
±15 percent of the installation mean and the leave tree basal areas be within ±3 percent
of the mean, as recommended by the study plan for stands where the estimated
average d.b.h. of leave trees was greater than 4.5 in, as at Hoskins. (Stands of smaller
diameter were controlled by using numbers of trees instead of basal area.)

The calibration thinning was a precommercial thinning done as a training exercise by a
state of Oregon Forestry Department emergency crew. The trees were felled and the
crowns lopped in place. The crew used axe handles to break off all dead branches on
live trees (5 to 6 ft off the ground) to facilitate marking.

Thinning treatments—Plots were thinned at intervals of 10 ft of crop tree height growth
(Staebler 1960). This standard was intended to give close control of growing stock and
adjust thinning intervals to rate of height growth and crown expansion. Treatment thin-
nings were made at Hoskins in 1966, 1970, 1973, 1975, and 1979 at total ages of 23,
27, 30, 32, and 36 years, respectively. For unknown reasons, the 1975 measurement
and treatment were premature, occurring after only about half of the required periodic
height growth of 10 ft. This may have resulted in some inconsistent results in periodic
annual increment trends for this short period.

Thinning treatments were defined in terms of gross basal area growth on the controls
and predetermined percentages of the control gross basal area increment to be retained
for each thinning regime (see table on inside front cover and table 1). This assumed that
gross basal area growth of the controls represented the productive capacity of the site.
Specifications were designed to produce a wide range in densities.

Basal area to be left after thinning on each plot was calculated with the following
formula:

                                 BAp = BAp-1 + GBAG(Pt p ) ,

where BAp = basal area (square feet/acre) retained after thinning at the beginning of the
treatment period (p), BAp-1 = basal area (square feet/acre) at the beginning of the
preceding treatment period (p-1), GBAG = average gross basal area growth on the
controls (that is, the increase in basal area of the live trees plus the mortality) during the
preceding period, and Ptp = predetermined percentage of gross basal area growth on the
controls to be retained for the respective period (p) and treatment (t) (see table on inside
front cover).




                                                                                             5
    Table 1—Treatments defined by percentage of gross basal area increment of
    control retained after thinning (calibration thinning excluded)

                                                                     Thinning
    Treatment                               First       Second         Third         Fourth   Fifth
                                                                 Percent retention
    Fixed:
      1                                      10            10            10              10   10
      3                                      30            30            30              30   30
      5                                      50            50            50              50   50
      7                                      70            70            70              70   70
    Increasing:
      2                                      10            20            30              40   50
      4                                      30            40            50              60   70
    Decreasing:
      6                                      50            40            30              20   10
      8                                      70            60            50              40   30
    Unthinned:
      C                                      —             —             —               —     —




    Figure 4—Idealized trends in basal area for the eight thinning regimes in the LOGS
    study.


    The expected trends in residual basal area created by the eight treatments are shown in
    figure 4.

    The eight treatments all accumulated basal area growing stock throughout the
    experiment (that is, all treatments increased in basal area) but at fixed, increasing, or
    decreasing rates. The four fixed-percentage treatments (1, 3, 5, and 7) always retained
    growing stock at four constant percentages of the control plots’ gross basal area growth.
    The levels are 10, 30, 50, and 70 percent, representing heavy to light thinnings,
    respectively. The variable-percentage treatments represent two increasing- and two
    decreasing-percentage treatment regimes. The increasing treatments accumulated



6
                      growing stock slowly at first through heavier cuts and then more rapidly with lighter
                      subsequent cuts. The percentages of growing stock retained progressed from 10 to 50
                      percent and from 30 to 70 percent for treatments 2 and 4, respectively. The decreasing
                      treatments did just the opposite, accumulating growing stock faster at first through light
                      initial thinnings and then at decreasing rates through heavier cuts, with retained
                      percentages progressing from 50 to 10 and from 70 to 30 for treatments 6 and 8,
                      respectively.

                      The thinning guidelines for tree removal were:

                      1. No crop trees were to be cut until all noncrop trees had been cut. In actuality, some
                         crop trees were replaced (see discussion below on crop tree selection).
                      2. The average diameters of trees removed at each thinning (d) were to approximate
                         average diameter of the noncrop trees before thinning (D) (that is, d/D = 1.0 for the
                         noncrop trees only) so long as noncrop trees were available for cutting. This resulted
                         in d/D ratios of less than 1.0 for all trees and approximated a crown thinning.
                      3. After all noncrop trees had been cut, average diameter of cut trees should
                         approximate average diameter of all remaining trees.
                      4. Trees removed in a thinning were to be distributed across the entire diameter range
                         of trees available for cutting.
                      The actual range of treatment mean d/D ratios at Hoskins was from 0.83 (fourth
                      treatment thinning in treatment 4) to 1.03 (fourth treatment thinning in treatment 2) and
                      averaged 0.93 for all thinnings.

                      The intention was to cut no crop trees until all noncrop trees had been harvested. In
                      reality, this did not happen at Hoskins. Of the 384 crop trees initially selected on the
                      treated plots, 23 (6 percent) were replaced early during the study, primarily for slow
                      growth (one was cut after it developed a dead top). These replacements were distributed
                      throughout the treatments. Of the replaced crop trees, two survived through the fifth
                      treatment period after being replaced, one died (treatment 7), and the rest were cut in
                      the period after being replaced. During the last two treatment periods, 17 and 3 crop
                      trees were cut in treatments 1 and 2, respectively, after all noncrop trees had been cut.
                      In addition, one crop tree was cut from both treatments 3 and 5 for unknown reasons. In
                      the control plots, two crop trees died during the study and one was later replaced. See
                      discussion in Marshall and others (1992) for a comparison of growth rates of crop trees
                      and the 80 largest trees.

                      During the five treatment thinnings, trees were bucked and unmerchantable material and
                      tops were left on the plots. Merchantable logs were removed by horse and tractor (by
                      winching to skid trails). Logging damage was minimal.

Data Collection and   Immediately after the calibration thinning (1963), and at all subsequent measurement
Summarization         dates (1966, 1970, 1973, 1975, 1979, 1983, 1988, 1993, and 1998), diameters of all
                      tagged trees were measured to the nearest 0.1 in for trees 1.6 in and larger. Heights
                      were measured on a sample of these trees at the same time (sample size differed but
                      was not less than 12 trees per plot and usually was more) distributed across the range
                      of diameters. Height to the base of live crown also was measured on all height sample


                                                                                                                   7
           trees beginning in 1983. Heights and height-to-live-crown were measured on most of the
           felled trees. The heights-to-crown-base were estimated in 1963 from the dead branch
           “pruning” at plot establishment.

           Volumes are summarized for total stem cubic feet (CVTS), merchantable cubic feet to a
           6-in top diameter inside bark (CV6), and for Scribner board feet (SV632). Individual tree
           volumes were computed by using equations requiring diameters and heights for each
           tree. Missing tree heights were computed from height-diameter curves fit to each measure-
           ment by combining plot data for each treatment and using the methods of Flewelling
           (1994). Tree volumes in total stem cubic feet inside bark (CVTS) were computed with
           the Bruce and DeMars (1974) equation from measured diameters and actual or predicted
           tree heights. Merchantable cubic-foot volume (to a 6-in top diameter) was computed by
           using tarif equations (Brackett 1973, Chambers and Foltz 1979). Scribner board-foot
           volume was computed with a Douglas-fir taper equation2 and Scribner volume factors
           (Bell and Dilworth 1997; table 1). For each tree, the taper equation was used to compute
           the small-end diameter inside bark of each log. A log length of 32 ft was used with a
           minimum top log length of 16 ft to a 6-in top diameter inside bark. For each log, the
           specific Scribner volume factor for the log’s small-end diameter was used to multiply
           by the log length to get Scribner log volume. The individual log volumes were summed
           to get a tree volume. Per-acre estimates for each plot were obtained by adding up the
           volumes for the trees on the plot and multiplying by the plot “blow-up” or expansion
           factor (1.0/plot area).

           Basal area and volume growth are defined as periodic annual increment (PAI) and mean
           annual increment (MAI). Net PAI is computed as the difference between the live standing
           volume at the end of the period (before thinning treatments) and the live standing volume
           at the start of the period (after thinning treatments), which is divided by the period length.
           Gross PAI also includes the volume in mortality during the period. Net MAI is the total
           volume of the live stand plus the cumulative volume removed in thinnings, divided by
           the stand age. Gross MAI adds the cumulative volume of mortality to the live and
           thinning volumes. Diameter growth is summarized as both net PAI and as the growth
           on trees surviving the period (Curtis and Marshall 1989).

Analyses   The original study plan specified analysis of variance (ANOVA) as the method of analysis.
           This analysis was done for the specified five treatment periods and the results presented
           by Marshall and others (1992). Since the last treatment period, growing stock has been
           allowed to accumulate and comparisons of the ANOVA are less meaningful. Also, many
           aspects of the experiment are more meaningfully presented and interpreted through
           simple graphic comparisons, which will be given in the following sections.

           The underlying numerical values are summarized in a series of tables given in the
           appendix (tables 2-26). All tables are in English units with the stand development tables
           for each treatment (tables 20-26) also given in metric units.

           2
            Flewelling, J.W. 1994. Stem form equation development notes.
           Northwest Taper Cooperative. Unpublished report based on the
           methods of Flewelling and Raynes (1993). On file with: Dr. James
           Flewelling, 26724 51st Place S, Kent, WA 98032.




8
                         Figure 5—Observed H40 trend of the treatments (mean of eight thinning treatments)
                         and control compared with trends predicted by King (1966).




                         Figure 6—Thirty-five-year increment in H40 expressed as a ratio of H40 increment of
                         the controls, by treatment.


Results                  Top height (H40) and site index—Top height, defined as the mean height of the 40 largest
Live Stand Development   trees per acre by d.b.h., is a useful measure of height development and was used as a
                         basis for computing site index (table 2). From the initial stand tables, it appears that the
                         calibration thinning removed some of the top-height trees and significantly (p = 0.002)
                         reduced the initial top height of the thinned treatments compared to the control (fig. 5).
                         Between 1963 and 1998, top-height growth of the thinned treatments significantly (p =
                         0.0007) exceeded the top height growth on the controls, with a mean difference of 8
                         percent (range, 4 to 10 percent) (fig. 6). There was no relation between the thinning


                                                                                                                    9
     Figure 7—Thirty-five-year trends in estimated site index (King 1966) for the control
     and treatments (mean of eight thinning treatments).


     treatments and height growth. In 1998, the top height of the control was 3 ft less than
     the average of the treatments, although this difference was not significant (p = 0.13).
     Site index estimates for the control plots seem to have stabilized since stand age 27
     (breast height age 20) at about 134 ft (fig. 7). Those for the thinned plots have increased
     since the calibration thinning and now have an average site index of 137 ft.

     Mean diameters of the top height trees (largest 40 per acre) are shown in table 3.

     Trees per acre—The calibration thinning reduced the number of trees per acre (TPA)
     from an average of 1,718 (range, 1,595 to 1,885) on the controls to 330 on the treated
     plots (range, 305 to 395) (fig. 8, table 4). The range in initial TPA on the thinned plots
     reflects differences in average diameters and the fact that calibration density was
     controlled by basal area. The calibration cut removed mostly trees from the lower
     diameter classes but also may have cut some of the largest trees (fig. 9, table 5). In the
     35 years after establishment, TPA on the controls was reduced 82 percent, to an
     average of 307, by suppression-related mortality (fig. 8a). Mortality on the 24 treated
     plots has been low, ranging from 9.5 percent of the initial trees on the lightest thinning
     treatment (treatment 7) to 0.6 percent on the heaviest thinning treatment (treatment 1).
     On treatments 3 through 8, 80 percent of the mortality has occurred since the last
     thinning. The thinning treatments have produced a range in TPA from 202 to 52 at stand
     age 55 (fig. 8b).




10
Figure 8—Trends of live trees per acre over stand age, by treatment: (A) control, and
(B) treatments.




                                                                                        11
     Figure 9—Frequency distribution of trees per acre by 1-inch d.b.h. classes, by treatment, after the
     calibration thinning and in 1998.


     Basal area per acre—The initial basal area on the control plots averaged 138.0 ft2/acre.
     By stand age 55, the control plots had increased to 299.9 ft2/acre. Most of this increase
     (97 percent) occurred by stand age 40, after which mortality increased sharply and
     resulted in decreased basal area growth (fig. 10, table 6).




12
Figure 10—Trends in basal area per acre over stand age, by treatment.




Figure 11—Trends in quadratic mean diameter over stand age, by treatment.


Basal area controlled the calibration thinning which reduced the 24 thinned plots to a
uniform 49.8 ft2/acre (standard deviation of 0.9 ft2/acre). By stand age 55, the basal
areas ranged from 157.2 ft2/acre on the heaviest thinning regime (treatment 1) to 312.9
ft2/acre on the lightest thinning (treatment 7) (fig. 10). As of the last measurement,
treatment 7 has 4.3 percent more basal area than the control. If the control maintains its
low net growth rates (less than 1 ft2 • acre-1 • year-1), treatment 7 is on a trajectory to
increase this difference; and treatment 8 could have a basal area very close to the
control at the time of the next scheduled measurement, 5 years hence.


                                                                                         13
     Figure 12—Trends in stand density index (Reineke 1933) over stand age, by
     treatment.


     Quadratic mean diameter—Prior to the calibration thinning, quadratic mean diameter
     at breast height (QMD) (Curtis and Marshall 2000) averaged 3.8 in on the control plots
     (table 7). The calibration thinning increased the QMD to an average of 5.2 in on the 24
     treated plots. Thus, the d/D ratio (average diameter of the thinned trees/average diameter
     of all trees before thinning) of the calibration thinning was about 0.90, causing the 1.4-in
     increase in QMD. At stand age 55, the QMD of the control plot was 13.5 in, compared to
     16.9 in for the lightest thinning (treatment 7) and 23.6 in for the heaviest thinning
     (treatment 1) (fig. 11).

     Relative density measures—Many diameter-based measures of relative stand density
     have been developed, with most more or less equivalent. Two widely used measures of
     density in the Douglas-fir region are Reineke’s (1933) stand density index (SDI)

                                        SDI = TPA*(QMD/10)1.605 ,

     and Curtis’ (1982) relative density index (RD)

                                           RD = BAPA/QMD0.5 ,

     where BAPA is the basal area per acre.

     Trends over time in stand density, measured as SDI and RD, are shown in figures 12
     and 13, respectively. The initial stand, based on the controls, had an SDI of 364 and a
     RD of 71. After increasing rapidly for the first 10 years, SDI reached a plateau between
     ages 30 and 40. The maximum SDI of the stand seems to be 558, which occurred at
     stand ages 30 and 36. The maximum RD was 100 and occurred at stand age 30. These



14
Figure 13—Trends in Curtis (1982) relative density index over stand age, by
treatment.




Figure 14—Stand density management diagram (after Long and others 1988) for 35-
year stand development, by treatment.


values were apparently unstable, and after the maximum was reached, SDI and RD
decreased to values of 497 and 82 at the last measurement.

The calibration thinning reduced the stand to SDI 116 and RD 22. At the last measurement,
values for thinned treatments ranged from SDI 469 and RD 76 for the lightest thinning
(treatment 7) to SDI 206 and RD 32 for the heaviest thinnings (treatment 1).


                                                                                        15
     Figure 15—Trends in crown ratio (CR40) over stand age, by treatment: (A) fixed
     treatments, and (B) variable treatments.


     Figure 14 shows development of the control and treatments on a stand density manage-
     ment diagram (after Long and others 1988). For reference, this diagram has the published
     maximum SDI value of 600 and a line at 60 percent of maximum SDI representing the
     approximate lower limit of self-thinning (where competition-related mortality is expected
     to begin) (Long 1985). The suppression mortality of the controls have produced a typical
     self-thinning trajectory up to a measured maximum SDI of 558. After this, the control
     falls away from the maximum size-density line for the last four measurements. Thinnings
     maintained all the treatments between 20 and 60 percent of published maximum SDI.
     Since the last thinning, density has increased, and the highest density plots (treatments
     5, 6, 7, and 8) have reached or exceeded the approximate lower limit of self-thinning (60
     percent of the published maximum SDI of 600) and have begun experiencing mortality.




16
Figure 16—Trends in standing total stem cubic-foot volume (CVTS) per acre over
stand age, by treatment.


Crown ratio—Stand heights (H40) and crown ratios (CR40) of the largest 40 trees per
acre by d.b.h. (8 per plot) were calculated as means of the measured or estimated
values of all trees in this category. Missing tree heights were estimated from the height-
diameter curve for treatment and measurement. Missing crown ratios were computed by
using the Douglas-fir height-to-crown base model in Zumrawi and Hann (1989) calibrated
from an intercept correction based on measured values available at each measurement.
The CR40s computed for each treatment were smoothed over stand age with a third-
degree polynomial weighted by the number of measured crowns at each measurement.

The average crown ratio of the 40 largest trees by diameter (CR40) was 0.8 on the
control plots at the time of plot establishment. The calibration cut slightly decreased the
CR40 to 0.77. Subsequent crown recession was rapid, and by the next measurement, 3
years later, average CR40 was 0.68 (fig. 15). By stand age 34, CR40 on the control was
below 0.40 and at the last measurement was 0.21. Even though the trees were quite
open after the calibration, crown recession continued in the thinned treatments, although
at a slower rate than in the controls. As expected, CR40 is related to the level of growing
stock, with the higher stocking levels having shorter live crowns. The lightest thinning
(treatment 7) reached a CR40 of 0.40 at about stand age 44 and is currently at 0.30. The
heaviest thinning (treatment 1) had a CR40 of 0.43 at the last measurement. Although
the heavier thinning treatments have shown a much slower rate of crown recession
during the thinnings, they are resuming higher rates of crown recession as growing stock
accumulates after the last thinning treatment.

Standing total stem volume per acre—The initial total stem volume (CVTS) of the
control plots was 1,996 ft3/acre (table 8) with only 138 ft3/acre of that in merchantable
volume to a 6-in top (CV6). At the last measurement, the controls contained 14,312 ft3/
acre in CVTS and 12,924 ft3/acre in CV6. The calibration thinning removed an estimated
1,248 ft3/acre in CVTS and about 69 ft3/acre in CV6. The control has had more standing


                                                                                        17
                    Figure 17—Trends in standing merchantable cubic-foot volume to a 6-inch top (CV6)
                    over stand age, by treatment.


                    CVTS than all thinning treatments up to stand age 50 (fig. 16). By stand age 50, the
                    lightest thinning (treatment 7) had the same standing CVTS as the control, and at the
                    last measurement, treatment 7 contained nearly 8 percent more CVTS than the control.
                    The control still contained nearly 50 percent more CVTS than the heaviest thinning
                    (treatment 1).

                    Standing merchantable volume per acre—At the end of the calibration period (3 years
                    after the calibration cut), the thinned plots and control had similar standing CV6. Subse-
                    quent thinning has reduced standing CV6 volumes of all treatments, except the lightest
                    (treatment 7), to less than the control (fig. 17, table 9). Treatment 7 surpassed the controls
                    at about age 40. At the last measurement, the control contained nearly 47 percent more
                    standing merchantable volume than the heaviest thinning (treatment 1), whereas the
                    lightest thinning (treatment 7) contained 13 percent more than the control and the next
                    lightest thinning (treatment 8) had nearly the same volume as the control.

                    Standing Scribner volume per acre—Scribner board-foot volumes (SC6) are shown in
                    table 10.

                    Mortality and cut—Numbers, diameters, basal areas, and volumes of mortality trees
                    and cut trees are shown in tables 11 and 12.

Cumulative Volume   Cumulative volume production is standing live volume plus volume removed in all
Production          previous thinnings. Volume removed in the calibration thinning is not included.

                    Total stem volume—Cumulative total production of the controls in net total cubic volume
                    (CVTS) exceeded the net cumulative production of all thinning treatments (not including
                    the volume removed in the calibration thinning) until stand age 45, when cumulative


18
Figure 18—Trends in cumulative net total stem cubic-foot volume (CVTS) per acre
production (standing volume + thinnings) over stand age, by treatment. Volumes for
                                                 3
thinning treatments do not include about 1,248 ft /acre in the calibration thinning.




Figure 19—Trends in cumulative net merchantable cubic-foot volume (CV6) per acre
production (live standing + thinnings) over stand age, by treatment. Volumes for
                                               3
thinning treatments do not include about 69 ft /acre in the calibration thinning.


production of the lightest thinnings (treatments 7 and 8) exceeded the controls (fig. 18).
By stand age 55, treatment 7 had about 16 percent more net total stem volume than the
control, and treatment 8 had about 9 percent more. At the last measurement, the control
had similar cumulative volumes to the three lightest thinnings (treatments 5, 8, and 7). If
the approximately 1,248 ft3/acre removed in the calibration thinning is included, only the
three heaviest thinnings (treatment 1, 2, and 3) would not meet or exceed the

                                                                                         19
     Figure 20—Distribution of standing live total cubic-foot volume (CVTS), by tree
     diameter size class and treatment in 1998: (A) volume, and (B) percentage of total
     volume.


     cumulative volume on the control. For all the thinning treatments, volume production
     decreases with decreasing growing stock.

     Merchantable volume—Cumulative net merchantable cubic volume (CV6) production
     of the lightest thinning (treatments 7 and 8) have exceeded the cumulative production of
     the control since the calibration thinning (fig. 19). By stand age 55, treat-ment 7 had nearly
     20 percent more net merchantable volume than the control, whereas treatment 8 had
     nearly 12 percent more. Since the initial thinning treatment, the net volume production on
     the control has been similar to that of treatment 5. Inclusion or exclusion of the approx-
     imately 69 ft3/acre removed in the calibration would not alter the rankings. For the
     thinning treatments, volume production decreases with decreasing growing stock.




20
                             Figure 21—Distribution of cumulative net production (standing live + thinnings) of total
                             cubic-foot volume (CVTS), by tree diameter size class and treatment in 1998: (A)
                                                                                                          3
                             volume, and (B) percentage of total volume. Does not include about 1,249 ft /acre
                             removed in the calibration thinning.


Volume Distribution by    Currently there are no live standing trees, or volume, smaller than the 7.6-in diameter
Tree and Log Size Classes class on any of the treatments or the controls. All thinning treatments have over 85
                          percent of their standing live cubic-foot volume (CVTS) in trees 15.6 in or larger,
                          compared to about 50 percent for the controls (fig. 20, table 13). Nearly all standing
                          volume on the thinning treatments is in trees greater than 11.6 in. On the control, the
                          11.6- to 15.6-in class contains about 37 percent of the volume, and the 7.6- to 11.6-in
                          class contains about 13 percent. Comparing figures 20 and 21 shows that the trees
                          removed in all thinning treatments contributed relatively small volumes, which came
                          mostly from trees with d.b.h. of less than 12 in.




                                                                                                                        21
                             Figure 22—Percentage of distribution of live merchantable volume, by log diameter class: (A) cubic
                             volume (CV6) in fixed treatments and control in 1998, (B) cubic volume (CV6) in variable treatments and
                             control in 1998, (C) cubic volume removed in fixed treatments, and (D) cubic volume removed in thinnings
                             in variable treatments.


                             Figure 22 and tables 14 and 15 show the distribution of merchantable cubic-foot volume
                             in 32-ft logs by scaling diameter (diameter inside bark at the small end of the log with a
                             minimum log length of 16 ft). Tables 16 and 17 show corresponding values for Scribner
                             board-foot volumes. The heavier treatments produced a greater percentage of volume in
                             larger diameter logs. The heaviest thinning treatments (treatments 1, 2, and 3) have from
                             50 to 30 percent of their standing volume in logs with scaling diameters 16 in or greater
                             (minimum diameter for special mill grade), although quality premiums from these larger
                             logs would be reduced by the number and size of branches along the bole (fig. 22a)
                             (Christensen 1997).

Periodic and Mean Annual Net periodic annual increment (PAI) for basal areas and volumes was calculated from
Increments               the differences in live standing basal areas and volumes at the start and end of the
                         growth period. The gross PAI is the net PAI plus any mortality that occurred during the
                         period. Mortality has been minor in the thinning treatments, and thus gross PAI and net
                         PAI (excluding mortality) are nearly the same for the treatments. Mortality has been
                         substantial on the controls so that both net and gross PAI are presented for the controls.

                             The analysis of variance on PAI through the fifth and final treatment period (Marshall and
                             others 1992) showed that gross periodic annual growth in basal area, volume, and
                             quadratic mean diameter did not depart significantly from linear trends across the range
                             of growing stock levels of the eight treatments (excluding the control). Graphical




22
Figure 23—Basal area periodic annual increment in relation to midperiod basal area,
by period (TP = treatment period and MP = measurement period): (A) net, and (B)
gross.


analysis allows for the inclusion of the controls and the expected curvilinear relation
between growth and growing stock for a wider range of growing-stock values.

Basal area PAI—Figure 23 shows gross growth versus growing stock defined as basal
area per acre, and figure 24 shows growth in relation to relative density (Curtis 1982).
Net and gross PAI in basal area growth were nearly identical and approximately linear
across the range of growing stock for the eight thinning treatments. The maximum PAI
occurred at the lightest thinning treatment (treatment 7) with mortality causing a decrease
in net PAI for the control. For gross basal area growth (figs. 23b and 24b), the control’s
PAI was similar to that of the lightest thinning treatment (treatment 7) in all but the


                                                                                          23
     Figure 24—Basal area periodic annual increment in relation to midperiod relative
     density (Curtis 1982), by period (TP = treatment period and MP = measurement
     period): (A) net, and (B) gross.


     calibration and first treatment period. Mortality in the controls reduced net growth (figs.
     23a and 24b) to levels at or below the growth of all the thinning treatments after the
     calibration period, which caused a peak in net PAI at the higher densities of the lightest
     thinning treatments.




24
Figure 25—Net basal area periodic annual increment in relation to stand age, by
treatment: (A) fixed percentage treatments and control (net and gross), and (B)
variable percentage treatments and control (net and gross).


The reduction in growing stock by the calibration thinning reduced the calibration period
PAI of the thinned treatments by about 15 percent from the controls (fig. 25). Other than
the first treatment period where the lighter thinning treatments showed an increase in PAI
over the calibration period, PAI has decreased for all treatments over time. Heavy mortality
in the controls reduced net PAI of the control to near zero for the last three periods.




                                                                                           25
     Figure 26—Total stem cubic-foot-volume (CVTS) periodic annual increment in relation
     to midperiod basal area, by period (TP = treatment period and MP = measurement
     period): (A) net, and (B) gross.

     Total volume (CVTS) PAI and MAI—Figure 26 shows net and gross total stem cubic-
     foot-volume (CVTS) PAI versus growing stock defined as basal area per acre, and figure
     27 shows PAI in relation to relative density (Curtis 1982). As with basal area, there was
     little difference between net and gross PAI for the eight thinning treatments. The PAI
     trend also is generally linear across the range of growing stock levels of the eight
     thinning treatments. Volume PAI, however, maintained a stronger relation (steeper slope)
     between growth and growing stock than did basal area. For all but the first two treatment




26
Figure 27—Total stem cubic-foot-volume (CVTS) periodic annual increment in relation
to midperiod relative density (Curtis 1982), by period (TP = treatment period and MP =
measurement period): (A) net, and (B) gross.


periods, net PAI peaked with the highest density thinning treatment (7) as mortality
reduced the net growth of the controls (figs. 26a and 27a). Gross PAI increased with
growing stock, up to and including the control (figs. 26b and 27b). In the early periods,
inclusion of the higher growing stock levels of the controls gave a curvilinear relation. In
the later periods, as growing stock of the thinning treatments increased, gross PAI of the
light thinning (treatment 7) was similar to the control, and there was a more nearly linear




                                                                                         27
     Figure 28—Mean annual increment (MAI) and periodic annual increment (PAI) in net
     total stem cubic-foot volume (CVTS) in relation to stand age and treatment: (A) fixed
     percentage treatments and control (net and gross), and (B) variable percentage
     treatments and control (net and gross).


     relation between gross PAI and growing stock across the range of growing stock
     represented by all treatments and the control. Net PAI showed an increase for the first
     two to three periods after the calibration thinning and has been generally decreasing
     since (fig. 28).

     The MAI continues to increase for all treatments and seems to have culminated at age
     42 for net growth on the control, but it is not close to culmination for any of the thinning
     treatments. Over all thinning treatments, PAI values average about 40 percent greater
     than MAI, although PAI is decreasing on all but the two heaviest thinnings (treatments 1
     and 2).




28
Figure 29—Merchantable cubic-foot-volume (CV6) periodic annual increment in
relation to midperiod basal area, by period (TP = treatment period and MP =
measurement period): (A) net, and (B) gross.


Merchantable volume (CV6) PAI and MAI—Net and gross merchantable volume (CV6)
growth shows trends similar to those for total stem volume. The difference was in the
early periods when there was little merchantable volume in the controls and the growth
rate of trees on controls was low, which slowed recruitment while the higher growth rate
of trees on the treatments plot brought trees into merchantability sooner. This caused
net growth of the lighter thinning treatments to exceed the control for the first two
periods. In later periods, all the trees reached the merchantability limits, and mortality on
the control caused net growth to be less than the higher density treatments (figs. 29a
and 30a). Figure 29 shows growth versus growing stock defined as basal area per acre,
and figure 30 shows growth in relation to relative density (Curtis 1982).


                                                                                          29
     Figure 30—Merchantable cubic-foot-volume (CV6) periodic annual increment in
     relation to midperiod relative density (Curtis 1982), by period (TP = treatment period
     and MP = measurement period): (A) net, and (B) gross.


     Net MAI in merchantable volume has not culminated for any treatment or the control
     (net or gross), although values suggest that net growth on the control will culminate in
     the next period (about 12 years later than for total stem volume). As with total stem
     volume, all treatments except the two lightest thinnings are decreasing in PAI but less
     than for total stem volume (fig. 31).




30
Figure 31—Mean annual increment (MAI) and periodic annual increment (PAI) in net
merchantable cubic-foot volume to a 6-in top diameter inside bark (CV6) in relation to
stand age and treatment: (A) fixed percentage treatments and control (net and gross),
and (B) variable percentage treatments and control (net and gross).




                                                                                         31
     Figure 32—Mean annual increment (MAI) and periodic annual increment (PAI) in net
     Scribner board-foot volume (SV6) in relation to stand age and treatment: (A) fixed
     percentage treatments and control (net and gross), and (B) variable percentage
     treatments and control (net and gross).


     Scribner volume (SV6) PAI and MAI—Figure 32 shows the MAI/PAI trends for net
     Scribner board-foot volume as measured to a 6-in top in 32-ft logs (16-ft top log
     minimum). Although these trends appear more erratic than for merchantable cubic
     volume as logs jump to successively larger diameter classes, the MAI trends for all
     treatments are still increasing.




32
Figure 33—Periodic annual quadratic mean diameter growth in relation to midperiod
basal area, by period (TP = treatment period and MP = measurement period): (A) net,
and (B) survivor.


Diameter PAI—Average growth in quadratic mean diameter of surviving trees increased
165 percent on the thinned plots after the calibration thinning compared to unthinned
control. Diameter growth continues to be strongly related to growing stock. Figure 33
shows growth versus growing stock defined as basal area per acre, and figure 34 shows




                                                                                      33
     Figure 34—Periodic annual quadratic mean diameter growth in relation to midperiod
     relative density (Curtis 1982), by period (TP = treatment period and MP =
     measurement period): (A) net, and (B) survivor.


     growth in relation to relative density (Curtis 1982). There was little difference between
     net and survivor growth for the thinned plots. Net growth on the control was about twice
     the survivor growth, because of mortality in smaller trees. Growth on the controls was
     relatively constant, while diameter growth for all thinning treatments decreased with age
     (fig. 35). The increased growth at lower stocking and its relation to growing stock also is
     evident in the largest trees (fig. 36).




34
Figure 35—Periodic annual survivor quadratic mean diameter growth by treatment
and stand age (includes net periodic growth of the controls).




Figure 36—Thirty-five-year diameter increments of the 40 largest trees per acre, by
treatment, expressed as a ratio to the increment on the controls.




                                                                                      35
                    Figure 37—Trends in net basal area growth percentage over time, by treatment.


Growth Percentage   Growth percentage is an expression of growth relative to growing stock. The argument
                    that one should seek maximum return (growth) on growing stock, one expression of
                    which is net growth percentage, had an important place in the thinking that led to the
                    LOGS study.

                    Values of growth percentage for a growth period were calculated as:

                                                                                   PAIp
                                               growth percentage = 100                        ,
                                                                              (Xp-1 + Xp)/2


                    where PAI is the periodic annual increment and Xp-1 and Xp are the growing stock at the
                    beginning and end of the growth period, respectively.

                    Basal area growth percent—For all treatments and the control, net basal area growth
                    percentage declined over time (fig. 37) from initial values after the calibration of about 18
                    and 9.5 percent, respectively. The growth percentages of the thinning treatments were
                    similar, with differences among the treatments of less than 2.8 percentage points for all
                    periods. The higher density treatments had lower growth percentages at a given age,
                    even though their growth rates (PAI) were higher because of their greater growing stock
                    (larger denominator). On the controls, mortality reduced the net growth and therefore the
                    growth percentage.




36
Figure 38—Trends in net total stem cubic-volume (CVTS) growth percentage over
time, by treatment.


Total volume (CVTS) growth percentage—Like basal area, net total stem volume
growth percentage also declines over time (fig. 38). Initial values for the thinning treat-
ments and the control were about 24.5 and 17 percent, respectively. Period differences
among the thinning treatments were less than 2.5 percentage points. As with basal area,
the treatments with greater growing stock had lower growth percentages, and mortality in
the control reduced the growth percentage, although less so than for basal area. At stand
age 55, all the thinning treatments have growth percentages of less than 5 percent and
the control is now 2 percent.




                                                                                         37
     Figure 39—Trends in net merchantable cubic-volume (CV6) growth percentage over
     time, by treatment.




     Figure 40—Trends in net Scribner board-foot-volume (SV6) growth percent over time,
     by treatment.


     Merchantable volume (CV6) growth percentage—Net growth percentages of
     merchantable volume decrease with age and have less spread between treatments than
     those for total stem volume (fig. 39), with all thinning treatments within 2 percentage
     points for each period. The initial growth percentages for the thinning treatments were
     about double the values for CVTS (between about 50 and 55 percent), but they were
     nearly the same in later periods because all trees grew into the merchantable size class.
     There also was less difference between the growth percentage of the control and the


38
                    thinning treatments than for CVTS, which reflects the initially small amount of growing
                    stock (little merchantable volume) and the high merchantable growth rates on the
                    heavier thinnings.

                    Scribner volume (SV6) growth percentage—Net growth percentages of Scribner
                    volume (SV6) decrease with age and have a spread between treatments similar to CV6
                    (fig. 40), with all thinning treatments within 2 percentage points. The initial growth
                    percentages were about 25 percent greater than for CV6 but were similar for the
                    measurement period. There also was less difference between the growth percentage of
                    the control and the treatments, which reflects the initially small amount of growing stock
                    (little merchantable volume) and the high merchantable growth rates on the heavier
                    thinnings.

Discussion          Because of its age and high site index, the Hoskins LOGS installation is the most
                    advanced in development of all the LOGS installations. As of the 1998 remeasurement,
                    it had completed 19 years of growth since the final treatment thinning and was at an age
                    some would consider for a final harvest. Curtis and Marshall (1986) and subsequent
                    reports in the LOGS series have shown that the installations are, in general, developing
                    similarly, though at different rates corresponding to differences in site quality. These
                    results therefore suggest that the other installations may develop similarly as they
                    accumulate growing stock after the last thinning treatment.

Stand Development   After age 25, the estimated site index on the control plots stabilized at around 134 ft
                    (50-year base). Fluctuations above and below this of about 1 ft represent measurement
                    error and probably weather factors. Before age 25, however, site index estimates were
                    lower. Any differences in height at these young ages can result in large differences in
                    estimated site. Also, the King (1966) site curves were constructed for unmanaged
                    natural stands, and estimates of site index in thinned stands are influenced by changes
                    in stand structure. Thus, these changes are not indications of changes in the productive
                    capacity of the site.

                    Mortality has been considerable on the high-density controls but minimal for all thinning
                    treatments. The control plots began experiencing mortality about the time of plot
                    establishment at a density level of about 60 percent of the published maximum SDI.
                    However, it appears that the actual maximum SDI for the Hoskins site is 558, less than
                    the published value of 600. As the plots have developed since the maximum was
                    reached, the controls seem to be tracking a self-thinning slope less than would be
                    suggested by the Reineke (1933) slope of -0.623. As densities on the thinned plots have
                    been allowed to accumulate after the last thinning treatment, indications are that
                    competition mortality may be beginning in the lightest thinning treatments but before the
                    lower limit of self-thinning (60 percent of maximum SDI) is reached, thereby giving
                    further evidence that the actual maximum self-thinning line for Hoskins would be lower
                    and have a different slope than the published curves (Long and others 1988).

Basal Area Growth   Both net and gross growth increased in a generally linear trend with growing stock
                    through the range of the thinned treatments, with the maximum basal area growth
                    occurring at the densest treatment. For gross growth, the treatments with the highest
                    densities had growth similar to the control. Suppression-related mortality markedly
                    reduced the net growth rates on the controls to near zero in the last two growth periods.


                                                                                                              39
                        Thinned plots have had little mortality to date. In the latest periods, growing stock on the
                        lightest thinning (treatment 7) has caught up to the controls.

                        The low net basal area growth on the controls produced a nearly constant basal area of
                        300 ft2/acre for the last 19 years, while basal areas on the thinning treatments continued
                        to increase. This has resulted in a crossover in standing basal area, with the lightest
                        thinning (treatment 7) having an average of 12 ft2/acre more basal area than the controls
                        at stand age 55 (19 years after the last thinning treatment).

Volume Growth           Like basal area growth, net and gross volume growth have increased with growing stock
                        in a generally linear trend across the range of growing stock of the thinning treatments.
                        The relation for volume was considerably stronger. This was expected given the strong
                        prolonged height growth pattern of Douglas-fir and the importance of height growth in
                        determining volume growth, as shown by Curtis and Marshall (1986) for the LOGS
                        studies. Unlike gross basal area growth, however, gross total stem volume growth has
                        not demonstrated a maximum within the range of growing stock attained by the thinned
                        treatments. This includes the later measurement periods where growing stock of the
                        lightest thinning matched the control’s growing stock. Mortality in the control reduced net
                        volume growth below that of the densest thinning treatment.

                        Both gross and net merchantable cubic-foot volume have shown maximum growth at the
                        lightest thinning treatments in the early periods. Greater merchantable growth on these
                        plots compared to the controls or more heavily thinned treatments was due to the trees
                        in the thinned plots reaching the merchantability limits faster than the control, while the
                        higher growing stock kept stand growth high compared to the lighter thinnnings. In later
                        periods, growth in merchantable volumes behaved much like total stem volume as all of
                        the trees reached the merchantable limit.

Diameter Growth         Diameter growth (PAI) of surviving trees (Curtis and Marshall 1989) is highly related to
                        growing stock and shows a strong decrease with increasing growing stock. After the
                        initial calibration thinning, quadratic mean diameter growth (PAI) of the surviving trees in
                        the thinned treatments showed a quick and dramatic increase of about 2.5 times over
                        the controls. Although net diameter growth was greater than the growth on the surviving
                        trees (reflecting the increase in average diameter from mortality in small trees), the
                        levels of both growth rates on the controls remained relatively consistent. Diameter
                        growth on the thinning treatments decreased after the first periods as growing stock
                        increased and crown ratio decreased in subsequent periods. This has resulted in a
                        shallower slope to the diameter growth to growing stock curve, but the diameter growth
                        for the heaviest thinning (treatment 1) is still two times growth of the control, which now
                        has growth rates similar to the lightest thinnings treatment of similar density.

Mean Annual Increment   Net PAIs for total stem cubic volume (CVTS) for the thinning treatments currently
                        exceed their MAI values by about 1.4 times, and MAI of the control appears to have
                        culminated at about 42 years. Gross volume PAI for the control is still much greater than
                        MAI; the difference reflects the heavy and increasing suppression-related mortality on
                        the control. Net merchantable cubic volume (CV6) PAIs for the thinning treatments
                        exceed MAI by about 1.5 times, and the net PAI for the control is about 10 percent
                        higher than the MAI, which appears likely to reach culmination in the next period.
                        Moving to higher merchantable standards, such as Scribner board-foot volume, seems


40
                        to further extend culmination age. For the thinning treatments, the net board-foot PAIs
                        averaged about 170 percent of the MAI with the control PAI about 120 percent of the
                        MAI.

Cumulative Volume and   Thinnings produced more volume in large trees and larger logs, compared to the control.
Tree Size               At the last remeasurement (stand age 55), over 85 percent of the standing live volume
                        on the thinned plots was in trees 15.6 in and larger compared to 49 percent on the
                        controls (fig. 20), which had all volume in trees at least 7.6 in. Most thinning volume was
                        in smaller trees (fig. 21). In the lighter thinnings, this was mostly trees 7.6 in and
                        smaller, while in the heavier treatments, volume in the 11.6-in-and-larger diameter class
                        was removed.

                        As of stand age 55, 50 percent of the 32-ft log volume (CV6) had a scaling diameter on
                        the control of less then 10 in (fig. 22). For the heaviest thinning treatment (1), this value
                        was about 16 in, and in the lightest thinning treatment (7), it was about 12 in. About 80
                        percent of the thinning volume came from logs 7 in or less.

Growth Percentage       Contrary to expectations at the time the experiment was begun, differences in growth
                        percentages among thinning treatments are relatively small, generally less than 3
                        percent. This occurred because of the strong relation between stocking levels and
                        volume growth. Reduced stand growth associated with lower stocking levels more or
                        less offsets the effect of reduced volume in the divisor of the growth percentage
                        expression.

                        Thinning increased and maintained higher growth percentage values of the thinning
                        treatments over the control for basal area, CVTS, and initial merchantable volumes
                        (CV6 and SV6). Differences in growth percentages among CVTS, CV6, and SV6 were
                        generally less at recent measurements than at earlier measurements (fig. 41). This
                        occurred because, as trees become larger, values of CVTS, CV6, and SV6 become
                        more nearly proportional.

                        The trends in decreasing relative growth with time were primarily a result of PAI
                        decreasing with age rather than stocking differences. By the last treatment period (age
                        50-55 years), the growth percentages were generally around 3 to 5 percent for volume
                        growth of the treatments. This is, of course, volume growth percentage and not value
                        growth percentage, which one would expect might be greater.

Management              The LOGS studies were not designed to test operational thinning regimes; the frequent
Implications            and light thinnings were used to provide close control of growing stock and would not be
Benefits of Thinning    operationally feasible in most situations. The information gained from the LOGS studies
                        is useful, however, in designing thinning regimes.

                        One of the primary objectives of the LOGS studies was to determine how growth is
                        related to growing stock in young Douglas-fir stands. A concept often cited at the time
                        the study was designed is referred to as the “Langsaeter hypothesis” (fig. 42), which
                        suggests that similar gross increment can be obtained over a wide range of growing
                        stock. To date, the LOGS studies have not supported this hypothesis in young Douglas-
                        fir; they have not shown a clear plateau. After thinning treatments were stopped and



                                                                                                                    41
     Figure 41—Net growth percentages in basal area, CVTS, CV6, and SV6 in the 1993-
     98 growth period: (A) by treatment, and (B) in relation to midperiod basal area.


     additional growing stock accumulated on the thinned plots, maximum growth still
     occurred at the highest growing stock levels within the range of thinning treatments,
     which is the lightest thinning (treatment 7). This is expected to continue until the
     thinnings accumulate enough growing stock to be impacted by suppression mortality
     and height growth rates are reduced (Curtis and Marshall 1986). The findings reported
     here for this installation (figs. 26b and 27b), the most advanced in development of the
     LOGS sites, suggest that this may be beginning to happen. Continued observations will
     be required to see if, with the onset of mortality in the denser treatments, they develop
     an extended plateau or a peak in growth over growing stock.



42
Figure 42—Relation between volume increment and growing stock as hypothesized
by Langsaeter (from Braathe 1957), with density types I-V denoted.


These results are consistent with findings from other long-term thinning studies that
show that thinning in Douglas-fir does not greatly increase cubic volume production.
Although small gains in volume may be attained, the major benefits from thinning are
from the following:
• Production of larger trees with correspondingly greater value per cubic foot
•   Ability to forestall or salvage most mortality and enhance stand vigor
•   Ability to produce wood while maintaining forest cover for extended periods
•   Enhancement of aesthetic and wildlife values, with concomitant possible reductions
    in user conflicts

Given initial spacing comparable to that achieved by the calibration cut, and relative
freedom from nonsuppression mortality, little additional volume production is gained
by repeated thinning of initially well-stocked stands until the stands approach relative
densities near the lower margin of the zone of competition-related mortality. This
corresponds roughly to an SDI of about 400 or an RD of about 60. Hence, the full
benefits of commercial thinning will be obtained only on moderate to long rotations
(>50 years on this high productivity site).

Two caveats need to be kept in mind as results of thinned vs. control and among LOGS
installations are compared:

1. LOGS installations were placed in stands carefully selected for uniformity and full
   stocking. Conditions on the thinned plots were little different from those existing on
   thousands of precommercially thinned acres. But the controls were in general denser
   and more uniform than many unthinned stands and relatively free of hardwoods. One
   therefore would expect higher volume production in early life on the controls than in


                                                                                           43
                             many unthinned stands, and gross volume gains from thinning therefore are probably
                             underestimated by simple comparisons of thinning vs. control treatments (Curtis and
                             others 1997).
                          2. Hoskins had an initially large number of trees compared to other LOGS installations.
                             One therefore would expect early volume growth on the control to be high and the
                             control to reach its upper density limit and undergo substantial mortality earlier than
                             in installations with a lower initial stocking.

                          Considerations of wildlife habitat or premiums for large diameters could, of course, alter
                          these generalizations. And, the ability to control species composition through thinning
                          also may have benefits not obvious in the uniform single-species-stand experiment
                          reported here.

Rotations and Timing of   The trends of net volume PAI and MAI-total, merchantable cubic, and Scribner-show
Final Thinnings           clearly that at age 55, this high productivity site stand is still considerably short of
                          culmination. A longer rotation would give increased volume and value production,
                          increased employment, and enhanced wildlife and aesthetic values. There clearly is
                          conflict among these possible objectives and the relatively short rotations that stem
                          from conventional financial analyses.

                          The clear relations between stocking and volume increment suggest that–from a timber
                          production standpoint–even–aged stand management regimes usually should aim to
                          produce relative densities near or slightly below the lower margin of the zone of competition-
                          related mortality at time of final harvest. Thinning should be timed in relation to the
                          rotation to meet this objective.

Evaluation of the         The Hoskins study specifically and the other LOGS plots generally have been providing
Study                     valuable information on the development of young Douglas-fir for two and a half
                          decades. The installations have provided a clean and consistently measured data set for
                          several modeling projects. Further observations at Hoskins will provide important
                          information on the long-term growth response to thinning in terms of MAI trends and
                          stand development, as densities build up subsequent to the cessation of thinning and
                          the start of competition-related mortality in the thinning treatments.

                          Overall analysis across the nine LOGS installations and integration with results of other
                          thinning and spacing studies probably will best be done through generalized stand
                          modeling. This is still in the future. There are, however, a number of more limited topics,
                          not adequately covered in this summary report, that we hope to address in the near
                          future. These include an expanded analysis and discussion of PAI and MAI trends and
                          their significance, and an examination of relations between crown development,
                          treatment regime, and stand density.




44
Metric Equivalents   1 inch (in) = 2.54 centimeters
                     1 foot (ft) = 0.3048 meter
                     1 mile (mi) = 1.6093 kilometers
                     1 acre = 0.405 hectare
                     1 square foot (ft2) = 0.09290 square meter
                     1 cubic foot (ft3) = 0.02832 cubic meter
                     1 square foot per acre (ft2/acre) = 0.2293 square meter per hectare
                     1 cubic foot per acre (ft3/acre) = 0.06997 cubic meter per hectare
                     1 tree per acre = 2.471 trees per hectare
                      o             o
                     ( F-32)/1.8 = C

Literature Cited3    Bell, J.F.; Dilworth, J.R. 1997. Log scaling and timber cruising. Corvallis, OR: John Bell
                       & Associates, Inc.
                     Braathe, P. 1957. Thinnings in even-aged stands: a summary of European literature.
                       Fredericton, NB: University of New Brunswick, Faculty of Forestry. 92 p.
                     Brackett, M. 1973. Notes on tarif tree volume computation. Resour. Manage. Rep. 24.
                       Olympia, WA: Washington Department of Natural Resources. 26 p.
                     Bruce, D.; DeMars, D.J. 1974. Volume equations for second-growth Douglas-fir. Res.
                       Note PNW-239. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific
                       Northwest Forest and Range Experiment Station. 5 p.
                     Chambers, C.J.; Foltz, B.W. 1979. The tarif system-revisions and additions. DNR Rep.
                       27. Olympia, WA: Washington Department of Natural Resources. 8 p.
                     Christensen, G.A. 1997. Development of Douglas-fir log quality, product yield, and stand
                       value after repeated thinnings in western Oregon. Corvallis, OR: Oregon State
                       University. 176 p. M.S. thesis.
                     Curtis, R.O. 1982. A simple index of stand density for Douglas-fir. Forest Science. 28(1):
                       92-94.
                     Curtis, R.O.; Marshall, D.D. 1989. On the definition of stand diameter growth for
                       remeasured plots. Western Journal of Applied Forestry. 4(3): 102-103.
                     Curtis, R.O.; Marshall, D.D. 2000. Why quadratic mean diameter? Western Journal of
                       Applied Forestry. 15(3): 137-139.
                     Flewelling, J.W. 1994. Considerations in simultaneous curve fitting for repeated height-
                        diameter measurements. Canadian Journal of Forest Research. 24(7): 1408-1414.
                     Flewelling, J.W.; Raynes, L.M. 1993. Variable-shape stem-profile predictions for western
                        hemlock. Part I: Predictions from DBH and total height. Canadian Journal of Forest
                        Research. 23(3): 520-536.
                     Franklin, J.F. 1979. Vegetation of the Douglas-fir region. In: Heilman, P.E.; Anderson,
                       H.W.; Baumgartner, D.M., eds. Forest soils of the Douglas-fir region. Pullman, WA:
                       Washington State University: 93-112.

                     3
                      Some references are to previous LOGS reports. Those citations
                     are given in the front matter and are not repeated here.




                                                                                                               45
     King, J.E. 1966. Site index curves for Douglas-fir in the Pacific Northwest.
       Weyerhaeuser For. Pap. 8. Centrailia, WA: Weyerhaeuser Forestry Research Center.
       49 p.
     Knezevich, C.A. 1975. Soil survey of Benton County, Oregon. Corvallis, OR: U.S.
       Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service. 119 p. In cooperation with:
       Oregon Agriculture Experiment Station.
     Long, J.N. 1985. A practical approach to density management. The Forestry Chronicle.
       61(1): 23-37.
     Long, J.N.; McCarter, J.B.; Jack, S.B. 1988. A modified density management diagram
       for coastal Douglas-fir. Western Journal of Applied Forestry. 3(3): 88-89.
     Reineke, L.H. 1933. Perfecting a stand-density index for even-aged forests. Journal of
       Agricultural Research. 46: 627-638.
     Smith, D.M.; Larson, B.C.; Kelty, M.J.; Ashton, P.M.S. 1997. The practice of
       silviculture: applied forest ecology. 9th ed. New York: John Wiley. 537 p.
     Staebler, G.R. 1959. Optimum levels of growing stock for managed stands. In: Proceedings
       of the Society of American Foresters. Washington, DC: Society of American Foresters:
       110-113.
     Staebler, G.R. 1960. Theoretical derivation of numerical thinning schedules for Douglas-
       fir. Forest Science. 6(2): 98-109.
     Tappeiner, J.S.; Bell, J.F.; Brodie, J.D. 1982. Response of young Douglas-fir to 16
       years of intensive thinning. Res. Bull. 38. Corvallis, OR: Oregon State University,
       School of Forestry. 17 p.
     Zumrawi, A.A.; Hann, D.W. 1989. Equations for predicting the height to crown base of
       six tree species in the central western Willamette Valley of Oregon. Res. Pap. 52.
       Corvallis, OR: Oregon State University, Forestry Sciences Laboratory. 9 p.




46
     Table 2—Heights of the 40 largest trees per acre, 1963-98, by treatment, plot, measurement date, and age (in parentheses)

                                                                                                Height at start of period                                                                                                    Appendix
                          Calibration          Treatment             Treatment              Treatment             Treatment             Treatment             Treatment              Treatment             Measurement
                            period              period 1              period 2               period 3              period 4              period 5              period 6               period 7               period 8
                           1963-66              1966-70               1970-73                1973-75               1975-79               1979-83               1983-88                1988-93                1993-98
     Treatment     Plot   (20-23 yr)           (23-27 yr)            (27-30 yr)             (30-32 yr)            (32-36 yr)            (36-40 yr)            (40-45 yr)             (45-50 yr)             (50-55 yr)
                            - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Feet - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     Fixed:
      1            3      39.5     49.2       49.1      61.6        60.2       71.5        69.5      75.0         74.9      86.2       86.0      97.4        97.4      108.9       108.9      121.2      121.2       132.3
                   8      40.9     49.3       49.2      63.8        63.6       72.7        70.8      76.8         76.0      88.4       86.8      98.6        98.6      109.9       109.9      119.7      119.7       128.3
                   20     39.3     49.5       49.0      62.2        62.0       70.8        70.9      76.4         76.4      87.2       87.1      99.3        99.3      110.6       110.6      123.8      123.8       134.5
                   Avg.   39.9     49.3       49.1      62.5        61.9       71.7        70.4      76.1         75.8      87.3       86.6      98.4        98.4      109.8       109.8      121.6      121.6       131.7
      3            7      38.6     49.4       49.4      62.8        61.9       71.5        71.2      77.1         76.2      88.4       88.4      98.7        98.7      111.3       111.3      122.9      122.9       133.4
                   11     38.0     47.4       47.1      61.0        60.6       70.3        71.5      76.9         76.9      89.1       89.1      98.1        98.1      111.6       111.6      124.4      124.4       133.3
                   21     37.7     48.9       48.9      60.7        60.9       72.2        71.9      78.2         78.2      90.2       88.8      98.6        98.6      110.9       110.9      124.0      124.0       131.5
                   Avg.   38.1     48.6       48.5      61.5        61.1       71.3        71.6      77.4         77.1      89.2       88.8      98.4        98.4      111.3       111.3      123.8      123.8       132.7
      5            9      39.8     50.7       50.7      62.2        62.8       72.6        72.3      78.9         78.9      90.3       90.3     101.0       101.0      112.8       112.8      126.4      126.4       133.6
                   24     38.8     49.4       48.7      62.3        62.3       71.7        71.8      78.1         78.1      89.6       89.6     101.8       101.8      114.6       114.6      129.6      129.6       134.3
                   27     39.1     48.5       48.5      61.0        60.9       69.5        69.2      76.9         76.4      86.9       86.9     100.3       100.3      111.7       111.7      124.9      124.9       131.6
                   Avg.   39.2     49.5       49.3      61.8        62.0       71.3        71.1      77.9         77.8      88.9       88.9     101.0       101.0      113.0       113.0      127.0      127.0       133.2
      7            12     39.1     48.6       48.6      62.5        61.6       71.3        71.3      76.8         76.8      88.0       88.0     100.1       100.1      111.7       111.7      125.0      125.0       133.5
                   14     38.5     49.8       49.8      63.2        62.6       72.1        72.1      78.2         78.2      89.0       89.0     100.6       100.6      113.3       113.3      124.6      124.6       135.1
                   19     38.1     47.5       47.5      60.7        60.8       70.9        70.9      76.6         76.6      88.1       87.7     100.3       100.3      112.1       112.1      124.2      124.2       134.4
                   Avg.   38.5     48.6       48.6      62.1        61.7       71.4        71.4      77.2         77.2      88.4       88.2     100.3       100.3      112.3       112.3      124.6      124.6       134.3
     Increasing:
       2           4      37.3     47.2       47.5      60.8        60.4       70.4        70.0      75.5         75.8      86.6       86.4      96.9        96.9      108.4       108.4      121.4      121.4       132.7
                   15     39.1     50.5       50.5      65.1        65.5       75.5        75.5      82.3         82.3      92.3       92.1     102.6       102.6      113.0       113.0      124.1      124.1       138.6
                   17     38.0     47.7       47.0      61.3        61.9       72.6        72.4      78.3         78.2      89.3       89.3     101.2       101.2      112.4       112.4      123.0      123.0       133.6
                   Avg.   38.1     48.4       48.3      62.4        62.6       72.8        72.7      78.7         78.8      89.4       89.3     100.2       100.2      111.3       111.3      122.8      122.8       135.0
      4            5      38.7     48.8       48.6      61.3        61.0       70.1        71.0      75.7         75.7      85.9       85.9      97.2        97.2      110.2       110.2      121.5      121.5       128.5
                   18     38.8     50.2       49.9      63.8        63.0       73.7        73.7      79.8         79.8      91.8       91.8     102.8       102.8      114.3       114.3      126.4      126.4       138.4
                   23     41.9     53.2       52.8      65.6        64.9       75.1        74.9      81.4         81.4      92.5       92.5     103.0       103.0      114.0       114.0      128.3      128.3       138.3
                   Avg.   39.8     50.8       50.5      63.5        63.0       73.0        73.2      79.0         79.0      90.1       90.1     101.0       101.0      112.8       112.8      125.4      125.4       135.1
     Decreasing:
      6            1      39.9     49.3       49.1      62.2        62.2       71.3        70.6      76.5         76.5      87.0       87.0  98.7            98.7      109.5       109.5      123.6      123.6       135.0
                   2      40.1     48.9       48.9      61.3        61.0       70.7        70.3      76.2         76.2      88.0       87.6  98.6            98.6      111.3       111.3      124.5      124.5       134.8
                   25     38.6     48.6       47.9      61.6        61.6       71.8        71.8      77.0         77.0      88.3       87.2  96.9            96.9      108.9       108.9      121.2      121.2       130.6
                   Avg.   39.5     48.9       48.6      61.7        61.6       71.3        70.9      76.6         76.6      87.8       87.2  98.1            98.1      109.9       109.9      123.1      123.1       133.4
      8            6      39.7     49.3       49.3      63.5        62.9       72.9        72.9      78.9         78.9      89.8       89.5 100.7           100.7      112.8       112.8      123.2      123.2       131.3
                   13     40.5     48.3       48.3      61.9        61.9       71.1        71.1      75.9         76.4      88.4       87.2  97.5            97.5      110.6       110.6      123.3      123.3       132.2
                   16     39.6     49.4       49.4      63.6        63.6       72.7        72.6      78.1         78.1      88.2       88.0  99.7            99.7      111.2       111.2      123.6      123.6       133.6
                   Avg.   39.9     49.0       49.0      63.0        62.8       72.2        72.2      77.6         77.8      88.8       88.2  99.3            99.3      111.5       111.5      123.4      123.4       132.4
     Unthinned:
      C            10     40.7     50.0       50.0      63.1        63.1       72.3        72.3      77.7         77.7      87.0       87.0  95.7            95.7      106.9       106.9      118.5      118.5       125.1
                   22     44.1     52.3       52.3      66.4        66.4       76.0        76.0      82.1         82.1      91.5       91.5 102.0           102.0      114.1       114.1      126.3      126.3       134.9
                   26     41.6     51.0       51.0      65.4        65.4       74.9        74.9      80.9         80.9      90.3       90.3  99.5            99.5      110.6       110.6      121.9      121.9       130.7
                   Avg.   42.1     51.1       51.1      65.0        65.0       74.4        74.4      80.2         80.2      89.6       89.6  99.1            99.1      110.5       110.5      122.2      122.2       130.2




47
48
     Table 3—Diameters of the 40 largest trees per acre, 1963-98, by treatment, plot, measurement date, and age (in parentheses)

                                                                                         Diameter at start of period
                          Calibration          Treatment             Treatment             Treatment              Treatment             Treatment             Treatment             Treatment             Measurement
                            period              period 1              period 2              period 3               period 4              period 5              period 6              period 7               period 8
                           1963-66              1966-70               1970-73               1973-75                1975-79               1979-83               1983-88               1988-93                1993-98
     Treatment     Plot   (20-23 yr)           (23-27 yr)            (27-30 yr)            (30-32 yr)             (32-36 yr)            (36-40 yr)            (40-45 yr)            (45-50 yr)             (50-55 yr)
                             - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Inches - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     Fixed:
      1            3       7.1      9.2         9.0     11.9        11.2       13.3        13.1      14.3         14.3      16.6      16.4       18.6        18.6        21.1       21.1       23.1         23.1        24.9
                   8       7.1      9.1         9.0     11.7        11.6       13.6        13.4      14.6         14.4      16.4      16.3       18.6        18.6        21.0       21.0       23.2         23.2        24.9
                   20      6.9      9.0         8.9     11.6        11.3       13.3        13.3      14.4         14.4      16.7      16.1       18.2        18.2        20.3       20.3       22.0         22.0        23.5
                   Avg.    7.0      9.1         9.0     11.7        11.4       13.4        13.3      14.4         14.3      16.6      16.3       18.5        18.5        20.8       20.8       22.8         22.8        24.4
      3            7       7.2      9.2         9.1     11.7        11.2       12.9        12.7      13.8         13.2      15.0      15.0       16.8        16.8        18.8       18.8       20.6         20.6        21.9
                   11      7.0      9.2         9.1     11.8        11.7       13.5        13.2      14.3         14.3      16.2      16.2       18.1        18.1        20.3       20.3       22.2         22.2        23.8
                   21      7.3      9.5         9.5     12.2        12.1       13.9        13.7      14.8         14.8      16.5      16.1       17.7        17.7        19.3       19.3       20.6         20.6        21.8
                   Avg.    7.2      9.3         9.3     11.9        11.7       13.5        13.2      14.3         14.1      15.9      15.8       17.5        17.5        19.4       19.4       21.1         21.1        22.5
      5            9       6.5      8.5         8.5     11.0        11.0       12.7        12.4      13.4         13.4      15.2      15.2       16.8        16.8        18.4       18.4       19.8         19.8        21.1
                   24      7.1      9.4         9.3     11.9        11.9       13.7        13.4      14.6         14.6      16.3      16.3       17.8        17.8        19.3       19.3       20.6         20.6        21.2
                   27      6.8      8.7         8.7     11.3        11.1       12.6        12.5      13.5         13.5      15.4      15.4       17.2        17.2        19.1       19.1       20.7         20.7        22.1
                   Avg.    6.8      8.9         8.8     11.4        11.3       13.0        12.8      13.8         13.8      15.6      15.6       17.3        17.3        19.0       19.0       20.4         20.4        21.4
      7            12      7.3      9.3         9.3     11.5        11.2       12.7        12.7      13.5         13.5      15.0      15.0       16.5        16.5        18.0       18.0       19.5         19.5        20.8
                   14      7.2      9.3         9.3     11.9        11.9       13.5        13.5      14.4         14.4      15.8      15.8       17.3        17.3        18.8       18.8       20.1         20.1        21.3
                   19      7.2      9.2         9.2     11.6        11.4       12.9        12.9      13.7         13.7      15.1      15.1       16.4        16.4        17.9       17.9       19.1         19.1        20.3
                   Avg.    7.2      9.3         9.3     11.6        11.5       13.0        13.0      13.8         13.8      15.3      15.3       16.8        16.8        18.2       18.2       19.6         19.6        20.8
     Increasing:
       2           4       6.7      8.7         8.5     11.5        11.1       13.1        13.0      14.3         14.2      16.2      16.1       18.0        18.0        20.1       20.1       21.7         21.7        23.1
                   15      7.3      9.6         9.6     12.6        12.5       14.8        14.8      16.2         16.1      18.3      18.0       20.1        20.1        22.4       22.4       24.2         24.2        25.8
                   17      7.0      9.1         8.7     11.2        11.0       12.9        12.8      14.0         13.9      16.0      16.0       17.9        17.9        19.9       19.9       21.3         21.3        22.8
                   Avg.    7.0      9.1         8.9     11.8        11.6       13.6        13.5      14.8         14.7      16.8      16.7       18.7        18.7        20.8       20.8       22.4         22.4        23.9
      4            5       6.8      8.7         8.7     11.2        11.1       12.8        12.6      13.5         13.5      15.3      15.3       16.8        16.8        18.3       18.3       19.6         19.6        20.3
                   18      6.7      8.8         8.7     11.3        11.0       12.8        12.8      13.9         13.9      15.8      15.8       17.5        17.5        19.2       19.2       20.7         20.7        22.1
                   23      7.7      9.8         9.8     12.5        12.4       14.3        14.1      15.2         15.2      17.0      17.0       18.6        18.6        20.2       20.2       21.6         21.6        22.9
                   Avg.    7.1      9.1         9.1     11.7        11.5       13.3        13.2      14.2         14.2      16.0      16.0       17.6        17.6        19.3       19.3       20.6         20.6        21.8
     Decreasing:
      6            1       7.1      9.3         9.3     11.8        11.8       13.6        13.2      14.3         14.3      16.0      15.9       17.8        17.8        19.5       19.5       21.2         21.2        22.6
                   2       7.1      9.1         9.1     11.6        11.4       13.2        12.9      14.1         14.1      16.0      15.6       17.3        17.3        19.4       19.4       21.0         21.0        22.5
                   25      6.8      8.9         8.9     11.4        11.4       13.1        13.1      14.1         14.1      15.9      15.9       17.6        17.6        19.4       19.4       20.9         20.9        22.2
                   Avg.    7.0      9.1         9.1     11.6        11.6       13.3        13.1      14.2         14.2      16.0      15.8       17.6        17.6        19.4       19.4       21.0         21.0        22.5
      8            6       7.2      9.4         9.4     11.8        11.6       13.2        13.2      14.1         14.1      15.8      15.7       17.4        17.4        19.2       19.2       20.8         20.8        22.1
                   13      7.8      9.9         9.9     12.2        12.0       13.4        13.4      14.1         14.1      15.6      15.2       16.7        16.7        18.3       18.3       19.6         19.6        21.0
                   16      7.0      9.0         9.0     11.3        11.3       12.9        12.7      13.6         13.6      15.1      14.9       16.5        16.5        18.1       18.1       19.4         19.4        20.7
                   Avg.    7.3      9.4         9.4     11.8        11.6       13.2        13.1      14.0         13.9      15.5      15.3       16.8        16.8        18.5       18.5       20.0         20.0        21.3
     Unthinned:
      C            10      7.3      8.6         8.6     10.2        10.2       11.2        11.2      11.7         11.7      12.7      12.7       13.7        13.7        14.9       14.9       16.0         16.0        17.2
                   22      8.0      9.4         9.4     11.3        11.3       12.5        12.5      13.3         13.3      14.7      14.7       16.1        16.1        17.8       17.8       19.4         19.4        21.0
                   26      7.4      9.2         9.2     11.1        11.1       12.3        12.3      13.0         13.0      14.1      14.1       15.1        15.1        16.3       16.3       17.5         17.5        18.8
                   Avg.    7.6      9.1         9.1     10.9        10.9       12.0        12.0      12.7         12.7      13.8      13.8       15.0        15.0        16.3       16.3       17.6         17.6        19.0
     Table 4—Number of trees per acre, 1963-98, by treatment, plot, measurement date, and age (in parentheses)

                                                                    Number of trees per acre
                          Calibration    Treatment     Treatment     Treatment      Treatment    Treatment    Treatment     Treatment     Measurement
                            period        period 1      period 2      period 3       period 4     period 5     period 6      period 7       period 8
                           1963-66        1966-70       1970-73       1973-75        1975-79      1979-83      1983-88       1988-93        1993-98
     Treatment     Plot   (20-23 yr)     (23-27 yr)    (27-30 yr)    (30-32 yr)     (32-36 yr)   (36-40 yr)   (40-45 yr)    (45-50 yr)     (50-55 yr)
     Fixed:
      1            3       345    345    210    210    115    115     85     85      70     70    50     50    50      50    50      50     50     50
                   8       380    375    225    225    120    120     80     80      70     70    50     50    50      50    50      50     50     50
                   20      335    335    210    210    120    120     85     85      70     70    55     55    55      55    55      55     55     55
                   Avg.    353    352    215    215    118    118     83     83      70     70    52     52    52      52    52      52     52     52
      3            7       390    390    295    295    200    200    160    160     145    145   115    115   115     115   115     110    110    105
                   11      340    340    240    240    160    160    125    125     105    105    85     85    85      85    85      85     85     85
                   21      300    295    220    220    165    165    135    135     120    120   105    105   105     105   105     105    105    105
                   Avg.    343    342    252    252    175    175    140    140     123    123   102    102   102     102   102     100    100     98
      5            9       355    355    315    315    250    250    215    215     195    195   175    170   170     165   165     160    160    160
                   24      345    345    280    280    230    230    200    200     180    180   165    160   160     160   160     145    145    125
                   27      395    390    340    340    270    265    225    220     205    205   170    165   165     160   160     155    155    150
                   Avg.    365    363    312    312    250    248    213    212     193    193   170    165   165     162   162     153    153    145
      7            12      330    330    330    330    300    300    275    275     260    255   240    235   235     230   230     215    215    210
                   14      325    325    310    310    270    270    245    245     230    230   210    210   210     190   190     190    190    190
                   19      330    330    330    330    290    290    265    260     240    230   225    225   225     220   220     220    220    205
                   Avg.    328    328    323    323    287    287    262    260     243    238   225    223   223     213   213     208    208    202
     Increasing:
       2           4       360    360    220    220    135    135    105    105      95     95    85     85    85      85    85      85     85     85
                   15      325    325    185    185    100    100     75     75      70     70    65     65    65      65    65      65     65     65
                   17      345    340    215    215    140    135    110    110     105    105    90     90    90      90    90      85     85     85
                   Avg.    343    342    207    207    125    123     97     97      90     90    80     80    80      80    80      78     78     78
      4            5       390    390    285    285    205    205    180    180     160    160   155    155   155     150   150     145    145    135
                   18      320    320    245    245    185    185    165    165     150    150   145    145   145     140   140     130    130    120
                   23      290    280    200    200    150    150    135    135     125    125   115    115   115     110   110     110    110    110
                   Avg.    333    330    243    243    180    180    160    160     145    145   138    138   138     133   133     128    128    122
     Decreasing:
      6            1       325    325    275    275    210    210    170    170     145    145   115    115   115     115   115     110    110    110
                   2       360    360    300    300    225    225    180    180     150    150   115    115   115     115   115     115    115    115
                   25      330    330    275    275    295    195    155    155     130    130   100    100   100     100   100      90     90     90
                   Avg.    338    338    283    283    210    210    168    168     142    142   110    110   110     110   110     105    105    105
      8            6       375    370    360    360    300    300    260    260     240    240   200    195   195     190   190     170    170    170
                   13      330    330    320    320    270    270    240    235     220    215   190    185   185     180   180     170    170    160
                   16      305    305    300    300    255    255    225    225     205    205   170    170   170     170   170     170    170    170
                   Avg.    337    335    327    327    275    275    242    240     222    220   187    183   183     180   180     170    170    167
     Unthinned:
      C            10     1885   1830   1830   1425   1425   1205   1205   1100    1100    885   885    735   735     540   540     410    410    345
                   22     1595   1430   1430   1110   1110    965    965    800     800    695   695    600   600     435   435     340    340    265
                   26     1675   1650   1650   1280   1280   1090   1090    915     915    720   720    625   625     490   490     380    380    310
                   Avg.   1718   1637   1637   1272   1272   1087   1087    938     938    767   767    653   653     488   488     377    377    307




49
50
     Table 5—Number of trees per acre by 1-in d.b.h. classes, after the calibration (1963) and in 1998, by treatment and age (in parentheses)

                 Treatment 1              Treatment 3            Treatment 5            Treatment 7            Treatment 2             Treatment 4             Treatment 6            Treatment 8                Control
                Start   End              Start End             Start End               Start End               Start End              Start End               Start End              Start End              Start End
     D.b.h.     1963    1998             1963 1998             1963 1998               1963 1998              1963 1998               1963 1998               1963 1998              1963 1998              1963 1998
     class      (20 hr) (55 yr)          (20 yr) (55 yr)       (20 yr) (55 yr)         (20 yr) (55 yr)       (20 yr) (55 yr)          (20 yr) (55 yr)         (20 yr) (55 yr)        (20 yr) (55 yr)        (20 yr) (55 yr)
     Inches    - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Number per acre - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     2                   0          0             0         0            0          0            0           0           0        0         0        0             0          0                       0            13         0
     3                   2          0             0         0            0          0            0           0           0        0         0        0             0          0            0          0          482          0
     4                 30           0           43          0           45          0           33           0          43        0        35        0            32          0           32          0          470          0
     5               122            0         100           0         105           0           75           0          75        0        78        0            87          0           83          0          357          0
     6               105            0           97          0         118           0           92           0        122         0      105         0          117           0         110           0          225          0
     7                 58           0           68          0           77          0           85           0          67        0        72        0            62          0           68          0          113          0
     8                 35           0           23          0           17          0           33           0          33        0        38        0            40          0           33          0            48         7
     9                   2          0             8         0            3          0           10           0           3        0         3        0             2          0            8          0             5        13
     10                  0          0             3         0            0          3            0           2           0        0         2        0             0          0            2          0             2        20
     11                  0          0             0         0            0          0            0           2           0        0         0        0             0          0            0          5             2        43
     12                  0          0             0         0            0          3            0         10            0        0         0        3             0          0            0        10              0        38
     13                  0          0             0         0            0          5            0         18            0        0         0        2             0          0            0          5             2        33
     14                  0          0             0         3            0          1            0         12            0        0         0        3             0          3            0          8             0        32
     15                  0          0             0         5            0        10             0         13            0        0         0        0             0          3            0          5             0        33
     16                  0          0             0         5            0          7            0         12            0        5         0      12              0          5            0        13              0        28
     17                  0          0             0         3            0        15             0         23            0        0         0      10              0          5            0        13              0        13
     18                  0          0             0         3            0        18             0         27            0        2         0      13              0          8            0        28              0        15
     19                  0          2             0         8            0        10             0         22            0        2         0      13              0          5            0        22              0         7
     20                  0          2             0       15             0        18             0         27            0        7         0      10              0        18             0        20              0         8
     21                  0          5             0       12             0        15             0         12            0       13         0      18              0        22             0        12              0         5
     22                  0          3             0       12             0        10             0         13            0        8         0      17              0          5            0        10              0         7
     23                  0          3             0       17             0        10             0           8           0       15         0      13              0        12             0          7             0         2
     24                  0        12              0         5            0          7            0           2           0       10         0        0             0          7            0          5             0         0
     25                  0          7             0         7            0          2            0           0           0        0         0        3             0          0            0          3             0         0
     26                  0        10              0         2            0          0            0           0           0       10         0        2             0          0            0          0             0         2
     27                  0          3             0         0            0          0            0           0           0        0         0        2             0          0            0          0             0         0
     28                  0          0             0         2            0          0            0           0           0        3         0        0             0          0            0          0             0         0
     29                  0          5             0         0            0          0            0           0           0        2         0        0             0          0            0          0             0         0
     30                  0          0             0         0            0          0            0           0           0        2         0        0             0          0            0          0             0         0
       Total        353          52         343         98         365       145          328        202         343         87          333       122           338       105          337       167        1,718        307
     Table 6—Basal area per acre, 1963-98, by treatment, plot, measurement date, and age (in parentheses)

                                                                                                         Basal area
                           Calibration            Treatment            Treatment             Treatment             Treatment            Treatment            Treatment             Treatment            Measurement
                             period                period 1             period 2              period 3              period 4             period 5             period 6              period 7              period 8
                            1963-66                1966-70              1970-73               1973-75               1975-79              1979-83              1983-88               1988-93               1993-98
     Treatment     Plot    (20-23 yr)             (23-27 yr)           (27-30 yr)            (30-32 yr)            (32-36 yr)           (36-40 yr)           (40-45 yr)            (45-50 yr)            (50-55 yr)
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Square feet per acre - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     Fixed:
      1            3        49.6      88.4       55.9    102.1       60.3       86.0        64.7      77.7        65.5      88.8      68.6      88.3        88.3      113.4      113.4      135.4     135.4       156.4
                   8        50.2      84.2       54.8     98.1       60.3       84.2        64.5      76.7        66.3      89.4      68.3      89.5        89.5      115.8      115.8      141.5     141.5       163.7
                   20       48.3      84.0       54.8     98.1       60.6       85.2        63.9      76.6        66.5      90.1      70.2      89.6        89.6      112.8      112.8      132.3     132.3       151.7
                   Avg.     49.4      85.5       55.1     99.4       60.4       85.1        64.4      77.0        66.1      89.4      69.0      89.1        89.1      114.0      114.0      136.4     136.4       157.2
      3            7        48.6      83.0       65.2    113.1       81.8      112.5        92.3     109.0        97.5     127.3     107.8     135.5       135.5      168.6      168.6      198.4     198.4       220.4
                   11       49.3      87.2       65.1    114.5       81.6      111.5        92.7     109.7        97.8     127.9     106.9     132.9       132.9      164.9      164.9      196.1     196.1       223.5
                   21       49.1      84.7       62.5    106.8       81.4      109.5        91.8     107.8        97.3     123.4     107.9     130.3       130.3      155.4      155.4      177.2     177.2       198.4
                   Avg.     49.0      85.0       64.2    111.5       81.6      111.2        92.3     108.8        97.5     126.2     107.5     132.9       132.9      163.0      163.0      190.6     190.6       214.1
      5            9        48.2      83.5       75.0    126.5      103.0      136.9       121.3     139.2       130.5     163.6     147.4     174.1       174.1      204.5      204.5      232.7     232.7       258.2
                   24       50.7      89.9       74.9    124.1      103.4      137.1       121.1     140.7       130.1     160.8     148.4     174.5       174.5      202.4      202.4      223.1     223.1       217.5
                   27       48.7      84.5       74.8    128.9      104.5      138.8       120.8     140.6       130.5     168.6     147.8     177.7       177.7      215.4      215.4      244.9     244.9       274.7
                   Avg.     49.2      86.0       74.9    126.5      103.6      137.6       121.1     140.1       130.4     164.3     147.9     175.4       175.4      207.4      207.4      233.6     233.6       250.1
      7            12       49.2      83.7       83.7    136.7      124.6      161.0       150.3     169.4       162.3     196.5     185.8     219.0       219.0      255.8      255.8      282.6     282.6       312.4
                   14       51.0      88.5       85.5    141.6      124.7      162.9       149.4     169.4       162.3     198.0     186.4     222.5       222.5      254.4      254.4      289.1     289.1       318.7
                   19       50.0      85.5       85.5    139.8      124.1      161.0       150.3     170.7       162.3     192.3     186.5     221.7       221.7      257.7      257.7      291.3     291.3       307.5
                   Avg.     50.1      85.9       84.9    139.4      124.5      161.6       150.0     169.8       162.3     195.6     186.2     221.1       221.1      256.0      256.0      287.6     287.6       312.9
     Increasing:
       2           4        50.3      87.3       56.0    102.2        66.1      93.5        77.0      93.0        84.3     112.3     102.0     129.2       129.2      161.0      161.0      188.6     188.6       213.0
                   15       50.1      88.3       57.0    102.6        66.1      93.1        77.3      92.3        85.7     111.8     102.0     127.0       127.0      155.5      155.5      180.3     180.3       204.2
                   17       49.7      85.8       54.7     96.7        66.4      91.3        75.0      89.0        84.2     110.1     100.6     126.2       126.2      154.2      154.2      171.1     171.1       196.4
                   Avg.     50.0      87.1       55.9    100.5        66.2      92.6        76.5      91.4        84.7     111.4     101.5     127.5       127.5      156.9      156.9      180.0     180.0       204.5
      4            5        50.7      88.4       66.9    116.2        86.6     117.8       105.8     124.1       115.3     145.6     140.6     170.5       170.5      200.3      200.3      227.2     227.2       237.8
                   18       49.6      85.9       65.6    113.5        87.3     118.0       105.5     122.9       115.9     145.4     140.4     168.8       168.8      197.6      197.6      209.1     209.1       231.6
                   23       51.0      85.8       64.4    108.3        87.0     115.6       105.2     122.1       116.1     144.7     139.4     166.1       166.1      193.3      193.3      218.0     218.0       242.1
                   Avg.     50.4      86.7       65.6    112.6        87.0     117.1       105.5     123.0       115.8     145.2     140.2     168.5       168.5      197.0      197.0      218.1     218.1       237.2
     Decreasing:
      6            1        50.2      87.2       75.2    125.9       98.1      131.0       107.8     126.1       111.8     141.6     115.4     143.7       143.7      175.0      175.0      202.0      202.0      227.6
                   2        50.5      89.1       75.1    128.2       97.6      131.8       108.1     127.4       111.4     144.7     115.0     145.0       145.0      182.3      182.3      213.7      213.7      243.3
                   25       48.8      87.6       75.0    128.1       97.9      131.6       108.9     127.8       111.6     143.0     114.4     140.3       140.3      169.1      169.1      178.5      178.5      202.6
                   Avg.     49.9      88.0       75.1    127.4       97.8      131.5       108.3     127.1       111.6     143.1     114.9     143.0       143.0      175.4      175.4      198.1      198.1      224.5
      8            6        51.2      88.8       86.7    141.5      118.8      154.2       136.7     154.9       145.7     179.9     154.7     187.7       187.7      226.0      226.0      253.9      253.9      282.2
                   13       51.0      88.1       85.6    137.2      118.6      152.8       136.3     153.9       143.9     175.4     154.4     183.1       183.1      212.8      212.8      237.2      237.2      259.1
                   16       49.0      86.6       85.2    139.1      118.6      155.4       137.4     157.9       144.1     180.1     153.7     188.4       188.4      228.4      228.4      262.2      262.2      292.4
                   Avg.     50.4      87.8       85.8    139.3      118.7      154.1       136.8     155.6       144.6     178.5     154.3     186.4       186.4      222.4      222.4      251.1      251.1      277.9
     Unthinned:
      C            10     134.1     178.4      178.4     218.8      218.8       242.8      242.8     250.5       250.5     260.7     260.7     274.6       274.6      269.4      269.4      263.5      263.5      267.6
                   22     158.1     201.7      201.7     245.9      245.9       275.1      275.1     277.2       277.2     300.2     300.2     320.2       320.2      319.6      319.6      325.3      325.3      326.2
                   26     121.8     173.9      173.9     221.2      221.2       249.8      249.8     256.1       256.1     272.7     272.7     290.5       290.5      300.1      300.1      303.6      303.6      305.9
                   Avg.   138.0     184.7      184.7     228.6      228.6       255.9      255.9     261.3       261.3     277.9     277.9     295.1       295.1      296.4      296.4      297.5      297.5      299.9




51
52
     Table 7—Quadratic mean diameter, 1963-98, by treatment, plot, measurement date, and age (in parentheses)

                                                                                          Quadratic mean diameter
                          Calibration          Treatment             Treatment             Treatment              Treatment            Treatment              Treatment             Treatment             Measurement
                            period              period 1              period 2              period 3               period 4             period 5               period 6              period 7               period 8
                           1963-66              1966-70               1970-73               1973-75                1975-79              1979-83                1983-88               1988-93                1993-98
     Treatment     Plot   (20-23 yr)           (23-27 yr)            (27-30 yr)            (30-32 yr)             (32-36 yr)           (36-40 yr)             (40-45 yr)            (45-50 yr)             (50-55 yr)
                            - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Inches - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     Fixed:
      1            3       5.1      6.9         7.0       9.4         9.8      11.7        11.8      12.9         13.1      15.3      15.9       18.0        18.0        20.4       20.4       22.3         22.3        23.9
                   8       4.9      6.4         6.7       8.9         9.6      11.3        12.2      13.3         13.2      15.3      15.8       18.1        18.1        20.6       20.6       22.8         22.8        24.5
                   20      5.1      6.8         6.9       9.3         9.6      11.4        11.7      12.9         13.2      15.4      15.3       17.3        17.3        19.4       19.4       21.0         21.0        22.5
                   Avg.    5.1      6.7         6.9       9.2         9.7      11.5        11.9      13.0         13.2      15.3      15.7       17.8        17.8        20.1       20.1       22.0         22.0        23.6
      3            7       4.8      6.2         6.4       8.4         8.7      10.2        10.3      11.2         11.1      12.7      13.1       14.7        14.7        16.4       16.4       18.2         18.2        19.6
                   11      5.2      6.9         7.1       9.4         9.7      11.3        11.7      12.7         13.1      14.9      15.2       16.9        16.9        18.9       18.9       20.6         20.6        22.0
                   21      5.5      7.3         7.2       9.4         9.5      11.0        11.2      12.1         12.2      13.7      13.7       15.1        15.1        16.5       16.5       17.6         17.6        18.6
                   Avg.    5.1      6.8         6.9       9.1         9.3      10.8        11.0      12.0         12.1      13.8      14.0       15.6        15.6        17.2       17.2       18.8         18.8        20.1
      5            9       5.0      6.6         6.6       8.6         8.7      10.0        10.2      10.9         11.1      12.4      12.4       13.7        13.7        15.1       15.1       16.3         16.3        17.2
                   24      5.2      6.9         7.0       9.0         9.1      10.5        10.5      11.4         11.5      12.8      12.8       14.1        14.1        15.2       15.2       16.8         16.8        17.9
                   27      4.8      6.3         6.4       8.3         8.4       9.8         9.9      10.8         10.8      12.3      12.6       14.1        14.1        15.7       15.7       17.0         17.0        18.3
                   Avg.    5.0      6.6         6.7       8.6         8.7      10.1        10.2      11.0         11.1      12.5      12.6       14.0        14.0        15.3       15.3       16.7         16.7        17.8
      7            12      5.2      6.8         6.8       8.7         8.7       9.9        10.0      10.6         10.7      11.9      11.9       13.1        13.1        14.3       14.3       15.5         15.5        16.5
                   14      5.4      7.1         7.1       9.2         9.2      10.5        10.6      11.3         11.4      12.6      12.8       13.9        13.9        15.7       15.7       16.7         16.7        17.5
                   19      5.3      6.9         6.9       8.8         8.9      10.1        10.2      11.0         11.1      12.4      12.3       13.4        13.4        14.7       14.7       15.6         15.6        16.6
                   Avg.    5.3      6.9         6.9       8.9         8.9      10.2        10.3      11.0         11.1      12.3      12.3       13.5        13.5        14.9       14.9       15.9         15.9        16.9
     Increasing:
       2           4       5.1      6.7         6.8      9.2         9.5       11.3        11.6      12.7         12.8      14.7      14.8       16.7        16.7        18.6       18.6       20.2         20.2        21.4
                   15      5.3      7.1         7.5     10.1        11.0       13.1        13.7      15.0         15.0      17.1      17.0       18.9        18.9        20.9       20.9       22.6         22.6        24.0
                   17      5.1      6.8         6.8      9.1         9.3       11.1        11.2      12.2         12.1      13.9      14.3       16.0        16.0        17.7       17.7       19.2         19.2        20.6
                   Avg.    5.2      6.8         7.1      9.5         9.9       11.8        12.2      13.3         13.3      15.2      15.4       17.2        17.2        19.1       19.1       20.6         20.6        22.0
      4            5       4.9      6.4         6.6      8.6         8.8       10.3        10.4      11.2         11.5      12.9      12.9       14.2        14.2        15.6       15.6       16.9         16.9        18.0
                   18      5.3      7.0         7.0      9.2         9.3       10.8        10.8      11.7         11.9      13.3      13.3       14.6        14.6        16.1       16.1       17.2         17.2        18.8
                   23      5.7      7.5         7.7     10.0        10.3       11.9        12.0      12.9         13.1      14.6      14.9       16.3        16.3        17.9       17.9       19.1         19.1        20.1
                   Avg.    5.3      7.0         7.1      9.3         9.5       11.0        11.1      11.9         12.1      13.6      13.7       15.0        15.0        16.6       16.6       17.7         17.7        19.0
     Decreasing:
      6            1       5.3      7.0         7.1       9.2         9.3      10.7        10.8      11.7         11.9      13.4      13.6       15.1        15.1        16.7       16.7       18.3         18.3        19.5
                   2       5.1      6.7         6.8       8.9         8.9      10.4        10.5      11.4         11.7      13.3      13.5       15.2        15.2        17.0       17.0       18.5         18.5        19.7
                   25      5.2      7.0         7.1       9.2         9.6      11.1        11.3      12.3         12.5      14.2      14.5       16.0        16.0        17.6       17.6       19.1         19.1        20.3
                   Avg.    5.2      6.9         7.0       9.1         9.3      10.7        10.9      11.8         12.0      13.6      13.9       15.5        15.5        17.1       17.1       18.6         18.6        19.8
      8            6       5.0      6.6         6.6       8.5         8.5       9.7         9.8      10.4         10.5      11.7      11.9       13.3        13.3        14.8       14.8       16.5         16.5        17.4
                   13      5.3      7.0         7.0       8.9         9.0      10.2        10.2      11.0         11.0      12.2      12.2       13.5        13.5        14.7       14.7       16.0         16.0        17.2
                   16      5.4      7.2         7.2       9.2         9.2      10.6        10.6      11.3         11.4      12.7      12.9       14.3        14.3        15.7       15.7       16.8         16.8        17.8
                   Avg.    5.3      6.9         7.0       8.9         8.9      10.2        10.2      10.9         11.0      12.2      12.3       13.7        13.7        15.1       15.1       16.5         16.5        17.5
     Unthinned:
      C            10      3.6      4.2         4.2       5.3         5.3        6.1        6.1        6.5         6.5        7.3       7.3        8.3         8.3        9.6        9.6       10.9         10.9        11.9
                   22      4.3      5.1         5.1       6.4         6.4        7.2        7.2        8.0         8.0        8.9       8.9        9.9         9.9       11.6       11.6       13.2         13.2        15.0
                   26      3.7      4.4         4.4       5.6         5.6        6.5        6.5        7.2         7.2        8.3       8.3        9.2         9.2       10.6       10.6       12.1         12.1        13.5
                   Avg.    3.8      4.6         4.6       5.8         5.8        6.6        6.6        7.2         7.2        8.2       8.2        9.1         9.1       10.6       10.6       12.1         12.1        13.5
     Table 8—Total stem cubic-foot volume per acre, 1963-98, by treatment, plot, measurement date, and age (in parentheses)

                                                                                                          Volume
                          Calibration           Treatment            Treatment             Treatment             Treatment            Treatment             Treatment             Treatment            Measurement
                            period               period 1             period 2              period 3              period 4             period 5              period 6              period 7              period 8
                           1963-66               1966-70              1970-73               1973-75               1975-79              1979-83               1983-88               1988-93               1993-98
     Treatment     Plot   (20-23 yr)            (23-27 yr)           (27-30 yr)            (30-32 yr)            (32-36 yr)           (36-40 yr)            (40-45 yr)            (45-50 yr)            (50-55 yr)
                            - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Cubic feet per acre - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     Fixed:
      1            3       749    1634        1040      2357       1399       2279       1708      2192         1859      2843      2197      3126        3126       4359       4359       5698 5698             7140
                   8       770    1563        1029      2325       1462       2309       1768      2256         1941      2947      2243      3266        3266       4578       4578       5963 5963             7268
                   20      737    1569        1028      2296       1433       2287       1727      2223         1923      2933      2288      3270        3270       4493       4493       5817 5817             7143
                   Avg.    752    1589        1032      2326       1431       2291       1734      2224         1908      2908      2243      3221        3221       4477       4477       5826 5826             7184
      3            7       742    1549        1223      2678       1941       3063       2519      3181         2847      4271      3629      5039        5039       6966       6966       8951 8951            10569
                   11      757    1630        1219      2715       1939       3043       2560      3233         2895      4281      3599      4868        4868       6763       6763       8801 8801            10598
                   21      752    1607        1181      2529       1912       2989       2508      3179         2866      4164      3619      4831        4831       6371       6371       8040 8040             9502
                   Avg.    750    1595        1208      2641       1931       3032       2529      3198         2869      4239      3616      4913        4913       6700       6700       8597 8597            10223
      5            9       725    1569        1412      3014       2461       3757       3346      4176         3926      5595      5035      6630        6630       8612       8612      10815 10815           12522
                   24      755    1667        1394      2909       2440       3717       3288      4151         3842      5429      4997      6645        6645       8520       8520      10528 10528           10792
                   27      707    1521        1349      2975       2413       3702       3223      4110         3801      5589      4899      6599        6599       8858       8858      11138 11138           13013
                   Avg.    729    1586        1385      2966       2438       3725       3285      4146         3857      5538      4977      6625        6625       8663       8663      10827 10827           12109
      7            12      742    1540        1540      3235       2936       4387       4094      4991         4785      6611      6237      8238        8238      10699      10699      13075 13075           15255
                   14      774    1648        1594      3366       2951       4455       4082      5015         4802      6672      6283      8401        8401      10785      10785      13448 13448           15741
                   19      747    1570        1570      3299       2922       4379       4097      5050         4804      6507      6299      8441        8441      10924      10924      13596 13596           15212
                   Avg.    754    1586        1568      3300       2936       4407       4091      5019         4797      6597      6273      8360        8360      10803      10803      13373 13373           15403
     Increasing:
       2           4       727    1602        1036      2377       1542       2524       2088      2682         2427      3670      3335      4677        4677        6401       6401 8311 8311 10030
                   15      743    1666        1094      2468       1631       2631       2199      2810         2606      3744      3427      4688        4688        6180       6180 7881 7881    9745
                   17      721    1565         997      2248       1553       2480       2038      2588         2446      3635      3328      4684        4684        6275       6275 7607 7607    9465
                   Avg.    730    1611        1043      2364       1575       2545       2108      2693         2493      3683      3363      4683        4683        6285       6285 7933 7933    9747
      4            5       725    1606        1220      2673       1997       3113       2819      3568         3324      4788      4615      6281        6281        8274       8274 10294 10294 11347
                   18      732    1616        1235      2708       2083       3222       2883      3662         3461      4923      4757      6377        6377        8283       8283 9595 9595 11435
                   23      788    1676        1275      2669       2143       3258       2970      3735         3554      4978      4802      6359        6359        8083       8083 10064 10064 11954
                   Avg.    748    1632        1243      2683       2074       3198       2891      3655         3446      4896      4725      6339        6339        8213       8213 9985 9985 11579
     Decreasing:
      6            1       757    1606        1392      2936       2291       3520       2907      3692         3260      4645      3796      5266        5266        7077       7077      9139 9139            11081
                   2       741    1608        1358      2943       2238       3481       2856      3643         3198      4735      3769      5283        5283        7411       7411      9688 9688            11795
                   25      725    1608        1376      2994       2304       3571       2973      3764         3298      4790      3821      5121        5121        6866       6866      7884 7884             9541
                   Avg.    741    1607        1375      2958       2278       3524       2912      3699         3252      4723      3795      5223        5223        7118       7118      8904 8904            10806
      8            6       777    1644        1607      3341       2814       4231       3754      4556         4299      6073      5219      7052        7052        9440       9440     11513 11513           13460
                   13      786    1639        1591      3256       2814       4207       3736      4516         4219      5881      5161      6818        6818        8891       8891     10970 10970           12649
                   16      766    1652        1626      3383       2884       4345       3845      4742         4326      6147      5248      7171        7171        9605       9605     12148 12148           14398
                   Avg.    776    1645        1608      3327       2837       4261       3778      4605         4281      6034      5210      7014        7014        9312       9312     11544 11544           13502
     Unthinned:
      C            10     1882    3194        3194      5049       5049       6414       6414      7064         7064 8506 8506 9907                       9907      10809      10809      11574 11574           12426
                   22     2373    3815        3815      5960       5960       7626       7626      8295         8295 10207 10207 12058                   12058      13378      13378      14923 14923           15963
                   26     1733    3167        3167      5222       5222       6753       6753      7473         7473 9142 9142 10730                     10730      12296      12296      13633 13633           14546
                   Avg.   1996    3392        3392      5411       5411       6931       6931      7611         7611 9285 9285 10898                     10898      12161      12161      13376 13376           14312




53
54
     Table 9—Merchantable cubic-foot volume (6-in top diameter inside bark) per acre, 1963-98, by treatment, plot, measurement date,
     and age (in parentheses)

                                                                                                  Volume to 6-inch top
                          Calibration            Treatment             Treatment            Treatment             Treatment            Treatment             Treatment             Treatment            Measurement
                            period                period 1              period 2             period 3              period 4             period 5              period 6              period 7              period 8
                           1963-66                1966-70               1970-73              1973-75               1975-79              1979-83               1983-88               1988-93               1993-98
     Treatment     Plot   (20-23 yr)             (23-27 yr)            (27-30 yr)           (30-32 yr)            (32-36 yr)           (36-40 yr)            (40-45 yr)            (45-50 yr)            (50-55 yr)
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Cubic feet per acre - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     Fixed:
      1            3         60       566        392     1711        1063       1985       1493      1987        1690      2668      2073       2978        2978  4171  4171 5460 5460                            6847
                   8         68       485        376     1589        1090       1958       1561      2056        1764      2769      2118       3115        3115  4383  4383 5717 5717                            6973
                   20        53       536        372     1624        1066       1953       1502      2008        1752      2756      2149       3108        3108  4293  4293 5570 5570                            6846
                   Avg.      61       529        380     1641        1073       1965       1518      2017        1735      2731      2113       3067        3067 4283   4283 5582 5582                            6889
      3            7         67       406        370     1635        1245       2396       1994      2678        2396      3822      3291       4687        4687  6571  6571 8513 8513                           10100
                   11        57       632        512     1950        1451       2586       2220      2908        2637      4012      3382       4623        4623  6458  6458 8424 8424                           10156
                   21        96       667        492     1819        1388       2488       2104      2787        2520      3812      3316       4511        4511  6015  6015 7630 7630                            9043
                   Avg.      74       569        458     1802        1361       2490       2106      2791        2518      3882      3329       4607        4607 6348   6348 8189 8189                            9766
      5            9         27       485        454     1920        1604       2920       2643      3474        3306      4968      4470       6056        6056 8023   8023 10192 10192                         11848
                   24        63       648        576     2010        1705       2980       2659      3516        3277      4837      4450       6082        6082  7902  7902 9919 9919                           10242
                   27        41       421        390     1824        1519       2822       2490      3403        3147      4939      4384       6085        6085 8313   8313 10535 10535                         12382
                   Avg.      44       518        473     1918        1609       2907       2597      3465        3243      4915      4435       6074        6074 8079 8079 10215 10215                           11491
      7            12        75       585        585     2144        1942       3383       3188      4081        3936      5749      5433       7437        7437 9861   9861 12227 12227                         14374
                   14        77       666        651     2345        2071       3593       3306      4237        4084      5933      5626       7710        7710 10142 10142 12724 12724                         14945
                   19        74       599        599     2207        1965       3421       3233      4200        4039      5767      5572       7687        7687 10146 10146 12739 12739                         14360
                   Avg.      75       616        612     2232        1993       3466       3243      4173        4019      5816      5544       7611        7611 10050 10050 12564 12564                         14560
     Increasing:
       2           4         35       505        348     1681        1127       2149       1810      2420        2190      3429      3121       4436        4436       6109       6109       7950      7950       9606
                   15        99       725        567     1957        1370       2387       2030      2635        2444      3557      3255       4476        4476       5916       5916       7554      7554       9346
                   17        54       569        357     1586        1136       2101       1731      2294        2164      3347      3093       4423        4423       5970       5970       7264      7264       9055
                   Avg.      63       600        424     1741        1211       2212       1857      2450        2266      3444      3156       4445        4445       5998       5998       7589      7589       9336
      4            5         47       482        399     1736        1327       2468       2263      3023        2858      4317      4158       5798        5798       7760       7760       9745      9745      10797
                   18        39       627        487     1955        1513       2682       2402      3176        3036      4486      4333       5920        5920       7791       7791       9073      9073      10903
                   23       155       839        683     2058        1708       2844       2601      3360        3214      4615      4480       5997        5997       7687       7687       9598      9598      11420
                   Avg.      80       649        523     1916        1516       2665       2422      3186        3036      4473      4324       5905        5905       7746       7746       9472      9472      11040
     Decreasing:
      6            1         83       634        566     2076        1622       2877       2395      3183        2841      4225      3470       4918        4918       6684       6684      8702 8702            10576
                   2         72       590        525     1990        1539       2790       2317      3112        2775      4313      3452       4949        4949       7026       7026      9229 9229            11264
                   25        43       585        516     2114        1709       3021       2544      3348        2958      4445      3562       4839        4839       6535       6535      7530 7530             9129
                   Avg.      66       603        536     2060        1623       2896       2419      3214        2858      4328      3495       4902        4902       6748       6748      8487 8487            10323
      8            6         73       577        567     2134        1804       3183       2861      3663        3473      5202      4508       6344        6344       8691       8691     10826 10826           12710
                   13       129       677        664     2201        1932       3321       2955      3759        3510      5157      4530       6186        6186       8230       8230     10299 10299           11987
                   16        60       678        669     2390        2040       3532       3129      4050        3697      5525      4746       6655        6655       9044       9044     11513 11513           13692
                   Avg.      87       644        634     2242        1925       3345       2982      3824        3560      5295      4595       6395        6395       8655       8655     10880 10880           12796
     Unthinned:
      C            10        82       331        331     1238        1238       2290       2290      2894        2894      4381      4381       6073        6073  7940  7940 9502 9502                           10759
                   22       238       932        932     2530        2530       4073       4073      5061        5061      7016      7016       9174        9174 11347 11347 13434 13434                         14837
                   26        94       557        557     1904        1904       3238       3238      4104        4104      5869      5869       7645        7645  9874  9874 11876 11876                         13175
                   Avg.     138       607        607     1891        1891       3200       3200      4020        4020      5755      5755       7631        7631 9720 9720 11604 11604                           12924
     Table 10—Scribner board-foot volume (6-in top diameter inside bark, 32-ft logs and 16-ft minimum top log) per acre, 1963-98, by
     treatment, plot, measurement date, and age (in parentheses)

                                                                                                          Volume
                          Calibration            Treatment            Treatment            Treatment             Treatment            Treatment            Treatment             Treatment           Measurement
                            period                period 1             period 2             period 3              period 4             period 5             period 6              period 7             period 8
                           1963-66                1966-70              1970-73              1973-75               1975-79              1979-83              1983-88               1988-93              1993-98
     Treatment     Plot   (20-23 yr)             (23-27 yr)           (27-30 yr)           (30-32 yr)            (32-36 yr)           (36-40 yr)           (40-45 yr)            (45-50 yr)           (50-55 yr)
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Scriber board feet per acre - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     Fixed:
      1            3          0      856        743      5854       3688      6191       4643 6081             5227 9760 7488 11463                     11463      17717      17717      26052 26052          35011
                    8         0      843        731      4907       3400      6080       4658 6700             5746 10273 7859 11904                    11904      19503      19503      27188 27188          34907
                   20         0     1043        818      5438       3504      6190       4681 6520             5693 10365 8099 12224                    12224      18892      18892      26487 26487          33727
                   Avg.       0      914        764      5400       3531      6154       4661 6434             5555 10133 7815 11864                    11864      18704      18704      26576 26576          34549
      3            7        100      649        550      5556       4300      8224       6970 9152             8085 15525 13226 19094                   19094      28077      28077      39527 39527          48049
                   11         0      806        699      6280       4781      7718       6616 9665             8700 15584 13045 18003                   18003      29103      29103      40531 40531          50458
                   21         0     1205        999      5877       4400      8153       6918 10018            8992 14422 12615 17942                   17942      26500      26500      36238 36238          43754
                   Avg.      33      887        749      5904       4494      8031       6835 9612             8592 15177 12962 18347                   18347      27893      27893      38765 38765          47420
      5            9          0      587        587      6246       5396     10073       9220 12170           11469 20108 18010 25150                   25150      35202      35202      47022 47022          56441
                   24         0      887        756      6322       5435      9470       8549 11775           10960 19030 17450 25386                   25386      34999      34999      47344 47344          49131
                   27         0      662        662      5978       5059      9435       8359 11263           10453 19544 17301 24717                   24717      36652      36652      48840 48840          58286
                   Avg.       0      712        668      6182       5297      9659       8709 11736           10961 19561 17587 25084                   25084      35618      35618      47735 47735          54619
      7            12         0      949        949      7110       6477     11576      10768 14099           13536 23108 21840 30969                   30969      43838      43838      57277 57277          67340
                   14         0     1087       1087      7817       6835     11791      10796 14583           13955 23809 22392 32210                   32210      44767      44767      59769 59769          70106
                   19         0     1030       1030      7155       6372     11589      11050 14644           13973 23276 22478 33037                   33037      44295      44295      58835 58835          68151
                   Avg.       0     1022       1022      7361       6561     11652      10871 14442           13821 23398 22237 32072                   32072      44300      44300      58627 58627          68532
     Increasing:
       2           4          0      543        331      5548       3659       6760       5651 7623            6884 13073 11942 17014                   17014      25824      25824      37517 37517          46798
                   15         0     1711       1493      6052       4193       7597       6427 9350            8596 13296 12260 17635                   17635      26759      26759      37069 37069          48777
                   17         0      693        362      5367       3935       6652       5479 7518            7166 12718 11815 17962                   17962      26049      26049      33615 33615          44730
                   Avg.       0      983        729      5655       3929       7003       5853 8164            7548 13029 12006 17537                   17537      26210      26210      36067 36067          46768
      4            5          0      774        662      5751       4351       7850       7319 9905            9311 17187 16566 23840                   23840      33860      33860      46156 46156          50591
                   18         0      912        693      6788       5291       8740       7815 11065          10615 17320 16713 23856                   23856      34821      34821      42991 42991          51931
                   23       112     2404       2279      6345       5212       9441       8527 12087          11548 18395 17856 23924                   23924      35086      35086      45722 45722          55396
                   Avg.      37     1363       1212      6294       4951       8677       7887 11019          10491 17634 17045 23873                   23873      34589      34589      44956 44956          52639
     Decreasing:
      6            1           0    1261       1149      6840       5240      9499 7938 10635                  9557 16271 13341 19952                   19952      28649      28649      40887 40887          51345
                   2           0    1249       1249      6326       4992      8965 7505 10021                  8965 16460 13117 19746                   19746      29262      29262      43298 43298          54044
                   25          0     893        781      7207       5833      9964 8229 11049                  9655 17263 13801 19392                   19392      27601      27601      35935 35935          44167
                   Avg.        0    1135       1060      6791       5355      9476 7891 10568                  9393 16665 13420 19697                   19697      28504      28504      40040 40040          49852
      8            6           0     980        980      6818       5772     10595  9295 12417                11841 20653 17901 27045                   27045      38616      38616      50677 50677          61038
                   13          0    1374       1374      7015       6350     10998  9750 12787                11832 20674 18196 25843                   25843      35245      35245      47343 47343          56721
                   16          0    1018       1018      8343       7137     11948 10677 14103                12868 22140 18916 27984                   27984      38887      38887      52576 52576          64790
                   Avg.        0    1124       1124      7392       6420     11180  9907 13102                12180 21156 18338 26957                   26957      37582      37582      50199 50199          60850
     Unthinned:
      C            10       156      357        357      2962       2962  7948  7948 10853                    10853 18464 18464 27445                   27445      37366      37366      45768 45768          52709
                   22       119     1705       1705      8592       8592 14683 14683 19065                    19065 29186 29186 40256                   40256      52372      52372      64095 64095          71377
                   26       119      980        980      5868       5868 11930 11930 15726                    15726 24963 24963 33975                   33975      45695      45695      56783 56783          62935
                   Avg.     131     1014       1014      5808       5808 11520 11520 15215                    15215 24204 24204 33892                   33892      45144      45144      55549 55549          62340




55
Table 11—Number, diameter, basal area, and volume of trees recorded as dead at the end of each period, by
treatment, measurement date, and age (in parentheses)

                                                                End of period
                     1966        1970        1973          1975          1979        1983        1988        1993      1998
Treatment           (23 yr)     (27 yr)     (30 yr)       (32 yr)       (36 yr)     (40 yr)     (45 yr)     (50 yr)   (55 yr)    Total

                                                        Number of trees per acre
Fixed:
   1                  2           0           0             0             0           0           0           0         0          2
   3                  2           0           0             0             0           0           0           2         2          6
   5                  2           0           2             2             0           5           3           8         7         29
   7                  0           0           0             2             5           2          10           5         7         31
Increasing:
   2                  2           0           2             0             0           0           0           2         0          6
   4                  3           0           0             0             0           0           5           5         7         20
Deceasing
   6                  0           0           0             0             0           0           0           5         0          5
   8                  2           0           0             2             2           3           3          10         3         25
Unthinned:
   C                 87         368         185           148          172          113         165         112        70       1420
                                                        Quadratic mean diameter
                                                                 Inches
Fixed:
   1                  3.18            .00      .00           .00           .00         .00         .00         .00       .00       3.18
   3                  3.75            .00      .00           .00           .00         .00         .00        9.32      8.49       7.59
   5                  4.94            .00     6.95          7.31           .00        9.97        5.76        9.31     10.38       8.90
   7                   .00            .00      .00          4.76          8.66        5.39        6.88        9.77     11.43       8.69
Increasing:
   2                  3.83            .00     3.91           .00           .00            .00      .00       13.06       .00       8.17
   4                  4.31            .00      .00           .00           .00            .00     8.14       14.66     12.95      11.48
Decreasing:
   6                   .00            .00         .00        .00           .00         .00         .00       15.06       .00      15.06
   8                  4.56            .00         .00       4.56          4.39        6.22        7.35        7.75      9.18       7.08
Unthinned:
   C                  2.08        2.52        3.04          4.00          4.28        4.90        6.15        7.14      8.89       4.61
                                                              Basal area
                                                          Square feet per acre
Fixed:
   1                      .11         .00         .00           .00        .00         .00         .00         .00       .00        .11
   3                      .15         .00         .00           .00        .00         .00         .00         .95       .79       1.89
   5                      .27         .00         .53           .58        .00        2.71         .54        3.78      4.11      12.52
   7                      .00         .00         .00           .25       2.04         .32        2.58        2.60      4.99      12.78
Increasing:
   2                      .16         .00         .17           .00           .00         .00      .00        1.86       .00       2.19
   4                      .30         .00         .00           .00           .00         .00     1.81        5.86      6.40      14.38
Decreasing:
   6                      .00         .00         .00           .00           .00         .00         .00     6.18       .00       6.18
   8                      .23         .00         .00           .23           .21         .63         .88     3.28      1.38       6.84
Unthinned:
   C                  2.04      12.73         9.31         12.92       17.16    14.81            34.01       31.10     30.15     164.24
                                                                Volume
                                                            Cubic feet per acre
Fixed:
   1                  1.57         .00        .00            .00          .00         .00         .00          .00       .00       1.57
   3                  2.38         .00        .00            .00          .00         .00         .00        37.82     30.03      70.23
   5                  4.44         .00      13.36          16.11          .00       97.90       14.31       147.75    186.60     480.48
   7                   .00         .00        .00           5.69        65.85        9.04       83.63       104.78    231.21     500.21
Increasing:
   2                  2.48            .00     2.64           .00           .00         .00        .00        81.09       .00      86.20
   4                  4.25            .00      .00           .00           .00         .00      60.92       264.09    299.36     628.61



56
Table 11—Number, diameter, basal area, and volume of trees recorded as dead at the end of each period, by
treatment, measurement date, and age (in parentheses) (continued)

                                                    End of period
Treatment            1966      1970      1973       1975       1979         1983       1988       1993       1998
                    (23 yr)   (27 yr)   (30 yr)    (32 yr)    (36 yr)      (40 yr)    (45 yr)    (50 yr)    (55 yr)    Total

Decreasing:
  6                    .00       .00       .00        .00        .00         .00         .00     275.85        .00     275.85
  8                   3.84       .00       .00       4.91       5.29       19.53       32.15     127.15      61.40     254.27
Unthinned:
  C                 27.16     222.18    188.84     306.22      478.69     460.32     1208.68    1210.25    1296.59    5398.93
                                                        Volume
                                           Cubic feet to 6-inch top per acre
Fixed:
   1                   .00       .00       .00        .00        .00         .00         .00        .00        .00        .00
   3                   .00       .00       .00        .00        .00         .00         .00      30.18      21.56      51.73
   5                   .00       .00      6.02       8.56        .00       77.92         .68     104.26     150.47     347.92
   7                   .00       .00       .00        .00      46.37         .00       27.59      79.82     197.53     351.32
Increasing:
   2                   .00       .00       .00        .00           .00      .00         .00      75.67        .00      75.67
   4                   .00       .00       .00        .00           .00      .00       34.12     242.35     261.46     537.93
Decreasing:
   6                   .00       .00       .00        .00           .00      .00         .00     253.05        .00     253.05
   8                   .00       .00       .00        .00           .00      .35       15.66      61.49      39.83     117.32
Unthinned:
   C                   .00       .00       .00      18.63      26.26      27.89       253.80     471.58     867.12    1665.28
                                                       Volume
                                             Scribner board feet per acre
Fixed:
   1                   .00       .00       .00        .00        .00         .00         .00        .00        .00        .00
   3                   .00       .00       .00        .00        .00         .00         .00     143.88      83.73     227.61
   5                   .00       .00       .00      43.71        .00      336.67         .00     498.21     793.30    1671.89
   7                   .00       .00       .00        .00     200.46         .00      137.39     419.14     991.78    1748.78
Increasing:
   2                   .00       .00       .00        .00           .00      .00         .00     320.80        .00     320.80
   4                   .00       .00       .00        .00           .00      .00      207.02    1165.84    1266.96    2639.82
Decreasing:
   6                   .00       .00       .00        .00           .00      .00         .00    1188.08        .00    1188.08
   8                   .00       .00       .00        .00           .00      .00       83.73     386.04     238.02     707.79
Unthinned:
   C                   .00       .00       .00      83.73      83.73       99.92      945.10    2406.29    4606.12    8224.90
Decreasing:
   6                   .00       .00       .00        .00        .00         .00         .00     275.85        .00     275.85
   8                  3.84       .00       .00       4.91       5.29       19.53       32.15     127.15      61.40     254.27
Unthinned:
   C                27.16     222.18    188.84    306.22      478.69      460.32     1208.68    1210.25    1296.59    5398.93




                                                                                                                                57
Table 12—Number, diameter, basal area, and volume of trees cut, by treatment, period,
measurement date and age (in parentheses)

                                                          Start of period
Treatment            1966       1970       1973         1975        1979        1983     1988     1993
numbers              (23)       (27)       (30)         (32)        (36)        (40)     (45)     (50)       Total
                                                     Number of trees per acre
Fixed:
   1                137         97         35           13          18          0        0        0         300
   3                 90         77         35           17          22          0        0        0         241
   5                 52         62         35           18          23          0        0        0         190
   7                  5         37         25           17          13          0        0        0          97
Increasing:
   2                135         82         27            7          10          0        0        0         261
   4                 87         63         20           15           7          0        0        0         192
Decreasing:
   6                 55         73         42           27          32          0        0        0         229
   8                  8         52         33           18          33          0        0        0         144
Unthinned:
   C                  0          0          0            0           0       0           0        0           0
                                                     Quadratic mean diameter
                                                              Inches
Fixed:
   1                  6.4        8.6       10.4         12.4        14.4        0.0      0.0      0.0         8.6
   3                  6.5        8.4       10.0         11.0        12.5         .0       .0       .0         8.7
   5                  6.2        8.2        9.3         10.0        11.5         .0       .0       .0         8.6
   7                  6.1        8.6        9.2          9.0        11.5         .0       .0       .0         9.2
Increasing:
   2                  6.5        8.8       10.5         13.3        13.4            .0       .0       .0      8.3
   4                  6.7        8.6       10.3          9.4        11.5            .0       .0       .0      8.2
Decreasing:
   6                  6.6        8.6       10.1         10.3        12.7            .0       .0       .0      9.4
   8                  6.8        8.5        9.8         10.6        11.6            .0       .0       .0      9.8
Unthinned:
   C                      .0         .0         .0        .0          .0            .0       .0       .0          .0
                                                            Basal area
                                                       Square feet per acre
Fixed:
   1                 30.4       39.1       20.8         10.9        20.4        0.0      0.0      0.0      121.5
   3                 20.7       29.9       18.9         11.3        18.7         .0       .0       .0       99.5
   5                 11.1       22.9       16.5          9.8        16.4         .0       .0       .0       76.7
   7                  1.0       14.9       11.6          7.5         9.4         .0       .0       .0       44.5
Increasing:
   2                 31.2       34.3       16.2          6.7         9.9            .0       .0       .0     98.3
   4                 21.0       25.7       11.6          7.2         5.1            .0       .0       .0     70.6
Decreasing:
   6                 12.9       29.6       23.2         15.5        28.1            .0       .0       .0   109.3
   8                  2.0       20.6       17.3         11.0        24.2            .0       .0       .0    75.1
Unthinned:
   C                      .0         .0         .0           .0       .0            .0       .0       .0          .0
                                                            Volume
                                                       Cubic feet per acre
Fixed:
   1                557        895        557          316        665           0        0        0        2990
   3                388        710        503          328        623           0        0        0        2552
   5                201        528        440          289        561           0        0        0        2018
   7                 18        363        316          221        324           0        0        0        1242
Increasing:
   2                569        789        437          200        319           0        0        0        2314
   4                389        609        307          209        172           0        0        0        1685




58
Table 12—Number, diameter, basal area, and volume of trees cut, by treatment, period,
measurement date and age (in parentheses) (continued)

                                                     Start of period
Treatment            1966     1970     1973        1975        1979       1983   1988   1993
numbers              (23)     (27)     (30)        (32)        (36)       (40)   (45)   (50)     Total
Decreasing:
  6                 232      680      612        447         928           0      0     0      2899
  8                  37      489      483        323         824           0      0     0      2156
Unthinned:
  C                   0        0        0           0            0          0     0     0         0
                                                         Volume
                                            Cubic feet to 6-inch top per acre
Fixed:
   1                149      568      447        282         618           0      0     0      2064
   3                111      440      384        273         553           0      0     0      1761
   5                 45      309      310        222         480           0      0     0      1364
   7                  5      239      223        153         273           0      0     0       893
Increasing:
   2                176      530      356        184         288           0      0     0      1534
   4                126      401      243        150         149           0      0     0      1069
Decreasing:
   6                 67      436      477        356         833           0      0     0      2170
   8                 10      316      364        264         700           0      0     0      1654
Unthinned:
   C                  0        0        0           0          0           0      0     0         0
                                                        Volume
                                              Scribner board feet per acre
Fixed:
   1                150     1869     1493        878        2317           0      0     0      6707
   3                137     1410     1197       1019        2215           0      0     0      5979
   5                 44      885      950        775        1974           0      0     0      4629
   7                  0      800      781        620        1161           0      0     0      3362
Increasing:
   2                254     1726     1151        615        1023           0      0     0      4769
   4                152     1343      790        528         589           0      0     0      3402
Decreasing:
   6                 75     1436     1586       1176        3245           0      0     0      7517
   8                  0      972     1273        922        2818           0      0     0      5986
Unthinned:
   C                  0        0        0           0           0          0      0     0         0




                                                                                                         59
     Table 13—Total stem cubic-foot volume (CVTS) per acre in trees with diameters
     larger than the indicated value in 1998 and cumulative (standing plus thinnings)
     1963-98

                                        Diameter at breast height (inches)
     Treatment      1.6           7.6                11.6               15.6     19.6
                                   Standing CVTS per acre
     Fixed:
        1         7183.7         7183.7              7183.7            7183.7    7027.9
        3        10223.2        10223.2             10223.2            9848.3    8353.1
        5        12108.7        12108.7             12039.5           10715.4    7038.8
        7        15402.9        15402.9             15324.5           13135.7    6789.1
     Increasing:
        2         9,746.8        9746.8              9746.8            9746.8    9194.4
        4        11,578.8       11578.8             11578.8           11269.6    7715.6
     Decreasing:
        6        10805.6        10805.6             10805.6           10491.9    8786.4
        8        13502.3        13502.3             13372.2           12220.2    6420.2
     Unthinned:
        C        14311.8        14311.8         12570.1                 7010.2   2678.5
                                  Cumulative CVTS per acre
     Fixed:
        1          10173.7       9884.0              8732.8            7624.2    7027.9
        3          12775.0      12538.8             11445.2           10096.9    8353.1
        5          14127.2      13970.1             12889.6           10715.4    7038.8
        7          16645.0      16600.7             15882.9           13205.3    6789.1
     Increasing:
        2          12060.9      11755.3             10771.1            9990.5    9299.8
        4          13264.2      13111.4             12149.3           11269.6    7715.6
     Decreasing:
        6          13704.5      13549.3             12341.5           10870.3    8786.4
        8          15658.3      15596.9             14616.0           12520.9    6420.2
     Unthinned:
        C          14311.8      14311.8             12570.1             7010.2   2678.5




60
Table 14—Percentage of merchantable cubic volume (CV6) of live trees in 1998
(stand age 55) in logs with scaling diameters larger than the indicated value

D.i.b.
class        Trt. 1      Trt. 3       Trt. 5        Trt. 7       Trt. 2       Trt. 4       Trt. 6       Trt. 8     Control
Inches      - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Percent - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
2              0.0           0.0          0.0           0.0         0.0       0.0           0.0           0.0           0.0
4                .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0
6              6.3           8.8        12.3          13.9          8.      10.0            9.6         12.9          27.6
8              7.9           8.6        11.8          14.0          6.2       9.1           9.1         10.9          26.6
10             4.5         11.5         16.5          18.9          7.0     15.8          10.5          20.8          23.1
12             8.7         19.6         24.7          28.6         16.6     25.5          19.3          26.1          11.9
14           20.8          22.0         21.1          19.2         21.8     23.2          29.7          19.2            7.5
16           27.8          25.0         11.3            5.4        24.1     12.7          18.0            7.9           2.3
18           16.3            2.8          2.3             .0       10.6       3.7           3.9           2.1           1.0
20             7.6           1.7            .0            .0        6.6         .0            .0            .0            .0
22               .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0
24               .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0
26               .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0
28               .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0
30               .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0


Table 15—Percentage of merchantable cubic volume (CV6) of thinning removals in
logs with scaling diameters larger than the indicated value

                                            Cumulative thinning
D.i.b.
class        Trt. 1      Trt. 3       Trt. 5        Trt. 7       Trt. 2       Trt. 4       Trt. 6       Trt. 8     Control
Inches      - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Percent - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
2              0.0           0.0          0.0           0.0         0.0       0.0           0.0           0.0           0.0
4                .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0
6            68.3          55.5         43.0          66.9         67.0     58.8          58.8          53.9              .0
8            21.3          20.1         30.9          12.1          9.6     15.2          26.1          17.3              .0
10           10.4          12.0         17.1          14.2          7.5     14.1          13.0          15.1              .0
12               .0          2.7          7.7           4.3        10.0       8.4           2.1           7.3             .0
14               .0          7.8          1.2           2.5         6.0       3.5             .0          4.6             .0
16               .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0          1.7             .0
18               .0          1.9            .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0
20               .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0
22               .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0
24               .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0
26               .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0
28               .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0
30               .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0




                                                                                                                              61
     Table 16—Percentage of Scribner board-foot volume (SV6) of live trees in 1998
     (stand age 55) in logs with scaling diameters larger than the indicated value

     D.i.b.
     class        Trt. 1      Trt. 3       Trt. 5        Trt. 7       Trt. 2       Trt. 4       Trt. 6       Trt. 8     Control
     Inches      - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Percent - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     2              0.0           0.0          0.0           0.0         0.0       0.0           0.0           0.0           0.0
     4                .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0
     6              4.0           6.7        10.3          12.6          5.5       8.2           7.4         11.1          28.0
     8              5.5           7.1        10.8          13.3          4.9       8.1           7.8         10.3          25.7
     10             4.5         12.5         17.9          21.2          6.7     17.3          11.4          23.0          23.5
     12             9.0         20.6         25.1          28.0         17.5     25.8          19.8          25.5          11.8
     14           23.1          22.4         21.5          19.4         22.9     23.6          30.9          19.6            7.6
     16           28.6          25.7         11.8            5.5        25.3     13.0          18.4            8.3           2.4
     18           16.9            3.0          2.5             .0       11.0       4.1           4.3           2.3           1.1
     20             8.3           2.0            .0            .0        6.2         .0            .0            .0            .0
     22               .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0
     24               .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0
     26               .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0
     28               .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0
     30               .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0


     Table 17—Percentage of Scribner board-foot volume (SV6) of thinning removals in
     logs with scaling diameters larger than the indicated value

                                                 Cumulative thinning
     D.i.b.
     class        Trt. 1      Trt. 3       Trt. 5        Trt. 7       Trt. 2       Trt. 4       Trt. 6       Trt. 8     Control
     Inches      - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Percent - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     2              0.0           0.0          0.0           0.0         0.0       0.0           0.0           0.0           0.0
     4                .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0
     6            69.7          46.0         31.3          56.4         57.1     43.6          55.9          42.7              .0
     8            19.5          17.5         25.6          12.4          7.8     14.3          24.0          14.4              .0
     10           10.8          12.6         24.8          15.1          8.1     19.2          14.7          16.5              .0
     12               .0          2.1        15.5            9.3         9.9     14.5            5.4           8.2             .0
     14               .0        16.1           2.8           6.8        17.1       8.3             .0        12.9              .0
     16               .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0          5.2             .0
     18               .0          5.7            .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0
     20               .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0
     22               .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0
     24               .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0
     26               .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0
     28               .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0
     30               .0            .0           .0            .0         .0         .0            .0            .0            .0




62
     Table 18a—Stand development table for treatment 1, per-acre basis (plots 3, 8, and 20)

                                                   After thinning                                               Removed in thinning                                                              Mortality
                         40 largesta                                    Volumec                                      Volume                        Avg. volume                                                 Volume
            Stand                                                Basal                                         Basal                                                                               Basal
     Year   age        HT       D.b.h. Trees          QMDb       area CVTS CV6                  Trees      QMD area CVTS CV6                       CVTS CV6           d/Dd     Trees     QMD       area      CVTS       CV6
                                                                   2             3                                     2                       3                                                       2            3
            Yr        Ft          In       No.         In    Ft   - - - Ft - - -               No.         In    Ft     - - - - - - - - Ft         ---------                      No.     In         Ft      - - - Ft - - -
     1963   20       40           7.0      353          5.1 49.4   752         61                0           0.0    0.0     0         0             0.0  0.0           0.00        0      0.0        0.0         0      0
     1966   23       49           9.1      215          6.9 55.1 1032         380              137           6.4 30.4 557          149              4.1  2.0            .96        2      3.5         .1         2      0
     1970   27       62          11.7      118          9.7 60.4 1431       1073                97           8.6 39.1 895          568              9.2  6.1            .93        0        .0        .0         0      0
     1973   30       72          13.4       83        11.9 64.4 1734        1518                35         10.4 20.8 557           447             15.9 12.8            .91        0        .0        .0         0      0
     1975   32       76          14.4       70        13.2 66.1 1908        1735                13         12.3 10.9 316           282             24.3 21.7            .94        0        .0        .0         0      0
     1979   36       87          16.6       52        15.7 69.0 2243        2113                18         14.3 20.4 665           618             36.9 34.3            .93        0        .0        .0         0      0
     1983   40       98          18.5       52        17.8 89.1 3221        3067                 0            .0     .0     0         0              .0   .0            .00        0        .0        .0         0      0
     1988   45      110          20.8       52        20.1 114.0 4477       4283                 0            .0     .0     0         0              .0   .0            .00        0        .0        .0         0      0
     1993   50      122          22.8       52        22.0 136.4 5826       5582                 0            .0     .0     0         0              .0   .0            .00        0        .0        .0         0      0
     1998   55      132          24.4       52        23.6 157.2 7184       6889                 0            .0     .0     0         0              .0   .0            .00        0        .0        .0         0      0

                            Cumulative yielde                    QMD growth             BA growth               Net volume growth                    Gross volume growth
                       Net  Gross          Net        Gross                                           CVTS CVTS CV6                     CV6        CVTS CVTS          CV6      CV6
                       CVTS CVTS           CV6        CV6        Net        Surv.     Net       Gross PAI MAI PAI                       MAI        PAI   MAI          PAI      MAI
                 - - - - - - - - - - Ft3 - - - - - - - - - - -   - - - - - In - - - - - - - Ft2 - - - -    - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Ft3 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     1963   20   752   752                 61          61        0.00        0.00      0.0       00         0       38         0         3        0        38           0          3
     1966   23 1589   1591                529         529         .54         .54     12.1       12.1     279       69       156        23      279        69         156         23
     1970   27 2883 2884                 1790        1790         .59         .59     11.1       11.1     323      107       315        66      323       107         315         66
     1973   30 3743   3744               2683        2683         .60         .60      8.2        8.2     287      125       298        89      287       125         298         89
     1975   32 4232   4234               3181        3181         .56         .56      6.3        6.3     245      132       249        99      245       132         249         99
     1979   36 5233   5234               4177        4177         .54         .54      5.8        5.8     250      145       249       116      250       145         249        116
     1983   40 6211   6213               5131        5131         .53         .53      5.0        5.0     245      155       238       128      245       155         238        128
     1988   45 7467   7468               6347        6347         .47         .47      5.0        5.0     251      166       243       141      251       166         243        141
     1993   50 8816   8817               7646        7646         .38         .38      4.5        4.5     270      176       260       153      270       176         260        153
     1998   55 10174 10175               8953        8953         .32         .32      4.2        4.2     272      185       261       163      272       185         261        163

     a
       40 largest: Average height and d.b.h. of the 40 largest trees per acre (estimated from d.b.h. and HT-d.b.h. curves).
     b
       QMD: Quadratic mean diameter at breast height.
     c
       Volume: All volumes are total stem cubic (CVTS) or merchantable cubic to a 6-in top diameter (CV6), inside bark.
     d
       d/D: Average d.b.h. cut : average d.b.h. before thinning.
     e
       Cumulative yield: net = standing + thinning; gross = standing + thinning + mortality; yield does not include any volume removed in a calibration cut. Volume (CVTS)
     removed in thinnings = 2,990 cubic feet (57 percent of the total gross yield at the time of the last thinning). Volume (CVTS) in mortality = 2 cubic feet (0 percent of the
     total gross yield).




63
64
     Table 18b—Stand development table for treatment 1, per-hectare basis (plots 3, 8, and 20)

                                                  After thinning                                                Removed in thinning                                                            Mortality
                                      a                                              c
                       100 largest                                      Volume                                        Volume                      Avg. volume                                                Volume
            Stand                                                Basal                                         Basal                                                                                Basal
     Year   age       HT       D.b.h. Trees          QMDb        area CVTS CV6                    Trees     QMD area CVTS CV6                      CVTS CV6            d/Dd     Trees        QMD    area    CVTS    CV6
            Yr        m    Cm             No.        Cm           m2    - - - m3 - - - - -       No.         Cm         m2 - - - - - - - - m3 - - - - - - - - -                     No.       Cm      m2    - - m3 - - -
     1963   20       12.7   17.8          873        12.9        11.4     53.2         4.7         0         0.0       0.0     0.0       0.0     0.0       0.0          0.00        0         0.0     0.0     0.0     0.0
     1966   23       15.6   23.1          531        17.4        12.7     72.8       27.1        338        16.2       7.0 39.5 10.9               .1        .1          .96        4         8.8      .0       .6      .5
     1970   27       19.6   29.8          292        24.6        13.9    100.7       75.6        239        21.9       9.0 63.1 40.3               .3        .2          .93        0          .0      .0       .0      .0
     1973   30       22.4   34.0          206        30.3        14.8    121.9      106.8         86        26.5       4.8 39.5 31.8               .5        .4          .91        0          .0      .0       .0      .0
     1975   32       23.7   36.7          173        33.5        15.2    134.0      121.0         33        31.2       2.5 22.6 20.2               .7        .6          .94        0          .0      .0       .0      .0
     1979   36       27.1   42.1          128        39.8        15.9    157.5      148.4         45        36.3       4.7 47.1 43.8             1.0       1.0           .93        0          .0      .0       .0      .0
     1983   40       30.5   46.9          128        45.3        20.5   226.0       215.2          0          .0        .0       .0        .0      .0        .0          .00        0          .0      .0       .0      .0
     1988   45       34.03 52.9           128        51.2        26.2   313.9       300.3          0          .0        .0       .0        .0      .0        .0          .00        0          .0      .0       .0      .0
     1993   50       37.6   57.8          128        56.0        31.4   408.3       391.3          0          .0        .0       .0        .0      .0        .0          .00        0          .0      .0       .0      .0
     1998   55       40.7   62.1          128        60.1        36.2   503.4       482.7          0          .0        .0       .0        .0      .0        .0          .00        0          .0      .0       .0      .0

                            Cumulative yielde                     QMD growth             BA growth             Net volume growth                        Gross volume growth
                      Net Gross Net                  Gross                                              CVTS CVTS CV6                    CV6       CVTS CVTS CV6                CV6
                      CVTS CVTS CV6                  CV6   Net          Surv.       Net           Gross PAI MAI PAI                      MAI       PAI  MAI  PAI                MAI
                    - - - - - - - - m3 - - - - - - - - - - - -    - - - -Cm - - -        - - - m2 - - - -   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - m3 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     1963   20        53.2        53.2       4.7         4.7      0.00     0.00           0.0       0.0       0.0       3.1       0.0        0.7    0.0        3.1        0.0        0.7
     1966   23      111.7 111.8             37.5       37.5       1.37     1.37           2.8       2.8     20.0        5.3 11.4             2.1 20.1          5.3      11.4         2.1
     1970   27      202.3 202.4 125.8 125.8                       1.50     1.50           2.5       2.5     23.1        7.0 22.6             5.1 23.1          7.0      22.6         5.1
     1973   30      262.5 262.6 188.3 188.3                       1.54     1.54           1.9       1.9     20.6        9.2 21.3             6.8 20.6          9.2      21.3         6.8
     1975   32      296.8 296.9 223.2 223.2                       1.42     1.42           1.5       1.5     17.6        9.8 17.9             7.5 17.6          9.8      17.9         7.5
     1979   36      366.8 366.9 292.9 292.9                       1.37     1.37           1.3       1.3     18.0 10.7 17.9                   8.6 18.0 10.7              17.9         8.6
     1983   40      435.3 435.4 359.7 359.7                       1.36     1.36           1.2       1.2     17.6 11.4 17.2                   9.5 17.6 11.4              17.2         9.5
     1988   45      523.2 523.3 444.8 444.8                       1.19     1.19           1.1       1.1     18.1 12.1 17.5 10.4 18.1 12.1                               17.5        10.4
     1993   50      617.6 617.7 535.7 535.7                         .96     .96           1.0       1.0     19.4 12.8 18.7 11.2 19.4 12.8                               18.7        11.2
     1998   55      712.7 712.8 627.2 627.2                         .82     .82           1.0       1.0     19.5 13.4 18.8 11.9 19.5 13.5                               18.8        11.9

     a
       100 largest: Average height and d.b.h. of the 100 largest trees per acre (estimated from d.b.h. and HT-d.b.h. curves).
     b
       QMD: Quadratic mean diameter at breast height.
     c
       Volume: All volumes are total stem cubic (CVTS) or merchantable cubic to a 15.25-cm top diameter (CV6), inside bark.
     d
       d/D: Average d.b.h. cut : average d.b.h. before thinning.
     e
       Cumulative yield: net = standing + thinning; gross = standing + thinning + mortality; yield does not include any volume removed in a Calibration cut. Volume (CVTS)
     removed in thinnings = 209.3 cubic meters (57 percent of the total gross yield at the time of the last thinning). Volume (CVTS) in mortality = 0.1 cubic meter (0 percent of
     the total gross yield).
     Table 19a—Stand development table for treatment 2, per-acre basis (plots 4, 15, and 17)

                                                   After thinning                                                 Removed in thinning                                                              Mortality
                                     a                                                  c
                       40 largest                                        Volume                                        Volume                      Avg. volume                                                   Volume
            Stand                                                 Basal                                          Basal                                                                               Basal
     Year   age       HT        D.b.h. Trees          QMDb        area CVTS CV6                  Trees       QMD area CVTS CV6                      CVTS CV6            d/Dd     Trees      QMD      area      CVTS       CV6
            Yr        Ft          In       No.         In         Ft 2    - - - Ft 3 - - - -     No.           In Ft 2    - - - - - - - - Ft 3 - - - - - - - - -                 No.        In       Ft 2      - - - Ft 3 - - -
     1963   20       38           7.0      343         5.2       50.0      730           63        0          0.0    0.0      0         0        0.0       0.0           0.00          0     0.0       0.0         0        0
     1966   23       48           9.1      207         7.1       55.9    1043          424       135          6.5 31.2 569           176         4.2       2.3            .95          2     4.2          .2       2        0
     1970   27       62          11.8      125         9.9       66.2    1575        1211         82          8.8 34.3 789           530         9.6       7.4            .93          0      .0          .0       0        0
     1973   30       73          13.6       97        12.2       76.5    2108        1857         27         10.5 16.2 437           356       16.2 13.2                  .90          2     4.3          .2       3        0
     1975   32       79          14.8       90        13.3       84.7    2493        2266          7         13.6   6.7 200          184       28.6 26.3                 1.03          0      .0          .0       0        0
     1979   36       89          16.8       80        15.4      101.5    3363        3156         10         13.4   9.9 319          288       31.9 28.8                  .89          0      .0          .0       0        0
     1983   40      100          18.7       80        17.2      127.5    4683        4445          0            .0     .0     0         0          .0        .0           .00          0      .0          .0       0        0
     1988   45      111          20.8       80        19.1      156.9    6285        5998          0            .0     .0     0         0          .0        .0           .00          0      .0          .0       0        0
     1993   50      123          22.4       78        20.6      180.0    7933        7589          0            .0     .0     0         0          .0        .0           .00          2    14.3       1.9       81       76
     1998   55      135          23.9       78        22.0      204.5    9747        9336          0            .0     .0     0         0          .0        .0           .00          0      .0          .0       0        0

                       Cumulative yielde                          QMD growth                BA growth             Net volume growth                    Gross volume growth
                      Net  Gross          Net         Gross                                            CVTS CVTS CV6                      CV6       CVTS CVTS           CV6      CV6
                      CVTS CVTS           CV6         CV6         Net     Surv.       Net        Gross PAI MAI PAI                        MAI       PAI   MAI           PAI      MAI
                 - - - - - - - - - Ft 3 - - - - - - - - - - -     - - - - - In - - - - - - - Ft 2 - - - -    - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Ft 3 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     1963   20   730   730    63    63                            0.00        0.00       0.0       0.0        0       37         0         3        0        37           0          3
     1966   23 1611   1614   600   600                             .56         .56      12.4      12.4      294       70       179        26      294        70         179         26
     1970   27 2933 2935 1917 1917                                 .60         .60      11.2      11.2      330      109       329        71      330       109         329         71
     1973   30 3903   3908  2918 2918                              .63         .61       8.8       8.9      323      130       334        97      324       130         334         97
     1975   32 4488   4493  3512  3512                             .57         .57       7.5       7.5      293      140       297       110      293       140         297        110
     1979   36 5678   5683  4690  4690                             .49         .49       6.7       6.7      297      158       295       130      297       158         295        130
     1983   40 6997   7002  5979  5979                             .46         .46       6.5       6.5      330      175       322       149      330       175         322        149
     1988   45 8599   8604  7532  7532                             .38         .38       5.9       5.9      320      191       311       167      320       191         311        167
     1993   50 10247 10334 9124   9199                             .31         .30       4.6       5.0      330      205       318       182      346       207         333        184
     1998   55 12061 12147 10870 10946                             .27         .27       4.9       4.9      363      219       349       198      363       221         349        199

     a
       40 largest: Average height and d.b.h. of the 40 largest trees per acre (estimated from d.b.h. and HT-d.b.h. curves).
     b
       QMD: Quadratic mean diameter at breast height.
     c
       Volume: All volumes are total stem cubic (CVTS) or merchantable cubic to a 6-in top diameter (CV6), inside bark.
     d
       d/D: Average d.b.h. cut : average d.b.h. before thinning.
     e
       Cumulative yield: net = standing + thinning; gross = standing + thinning + mortality; yield does not include any volume removed in a calibration cut. Volume (CVTS)
     removed in thinnings = 2314 cubic feet (41 percent of the total gross yield at the time of the last thinning). Volume (CVTS) in mortality = 86 cubic feet (1 percent of the
     total gross yield).




65
66
     Table 19b—Stand development table for treatment 2, per-hectare basis (plots 4, 15, and 17)

                                                 After thinning                                                 Removed in thinning                                                                  Mortality
                       100 largesta                                   Volumec                                         Volume                        Avg. volume                                                   Volume
            Stand                                              Basal                                            Basal                                                                                  Basal
     Year   age       HT       D.b.h. Trees         QMDb       area CVTS CV6                     Trees      QMD area CVTS CV6                       CVTS CV6            d/Dd     Trees        QMD      area      CVTS       CV6
                                                                 2                 3                                      2                     3                                                           2           3
            Yr        m         Cm       No.        Cm          m      ----m ----               No.         Cm         m --------m ---------                                       No.        Cm         m       ---m ---
     1963   20       12.1       17.7     848        13.2       11.5     51.6   4.9                0          0.0       0.0  0.0  0.0 0.0  0.0                           0.00        0          0.0       0.0      0.0 0.0
     1966   23       15.3       23.1     510        18.0       12.9     73.5  30.2              333         16.6       7.2 40.3 12.8  .1   .1                            .95        4         10.7        .0      0.7 0.5
     1970   27       19.5       29.9     309        25.3       15.2    110.8  85.3              202         22.3       7.9 55.7 37.6  .3   .2                            .93        0           .0        .0       .0  .0
     1973   30       22.7       34.5     239        31.0       17.6    148.1 130.5               66         26.8       3.7 31.1 25.4  .5   .4                            .90        4         10.9        .0      0.7 0.5
     1975   32       24.5       37.6     222        33.8       19.5    175.0 159.1               16         34.5       1.5 14.5 13.4  .9   .8                           1.03        0           .0        .0       .0  .0
     1979   36       27.8       42.8     198        39.1       23.4    235.9 221.4               25         34.2       2.3 22.9 20.7  .9   .8                            .89        0           .0        .0       .0  .0
     1983   40       31.1       47.5     198        43.8       29.3    328.3 311.6                0           .0        .0   .0   .0  .0   .0                            .00        0           .0        .0       .0  .0
     1988   45       34.4       52.8     198        48.6       36.1    440.5 420.4                0           .0        .0   .0   .0  .0   .0                            .00        0           .0        .0       .0  .0
     1993   50       38.0       56.9     193        52.5       41.4    555.8 531.7                0           .0        .0   .0   .0  .0   .0                            .00        4         36.4        .4      6.2 5.8
     1998   55       41.7       60.7     193        56.0       47.0    682.8 654.0                0           .0        .0   .0   .0  .0   .0                            .00        0           .0        .0       .0  .0

                          Cumulative yielde                    QMD growth               BA growth               Net volume growth                       Gross volume growth
                      Net  Gross          Net       Gross                                              CVTS CVTS CV6                     CV6        CVTS CVTS           CV6      CV6
                      CVTS CVTS           CV6       CV6        Net       Surv.           Net     Gross PAI MAI PAI                       MAI        PAI   MAI           PAI      MAI
                    - - - - - - - - - m3 - - - - - - - - - -    - - - - Cm - - -       - - - - m2 - - - -    - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - m3 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     1963   20       51.6        51.6        4.9        4.9     0.00      0.00            0.0       0.0      0.0        3.1       0.0        0.7    0.0        3.1         0.0        0.7
     1966   23      113.3 113.5            42.5        42.5     1.42      1.41            2.8       2.9     21.1        5.4 13.0             2.3 21.1          5.4       13.0         2.3
     1970   27      205.8 206.0 134.7 134.7                     1.53      1.53            2.6       2.6     23.6        8.1 23.6             5.5 23.6          8.1       23.6         5.5
     1973   30      273.7 274.1 204.8 204.8                     1.60      1.56            2.0       2.0     23.1        9.6 23.9             7.3 23.2          9.6       23.9         7.3
     1975   32      314.7 315.0 246.3 246.3                     1.45      1.45            1.7       1.7     21.0 10.3 21.3                   8.2 21.0 10.3               21.3         8.2
     1979   36      397.9 398.3 328.8 328                       1.24      1.24            1.5       1.5     21.3 11.5 21.1                   9.6 21.3 11.5               21.1         9.6
     1983   40      490.3 490.9 419.0 419.0                     1.17      1.17            1.5       1.5     23.6 12.7 23.1 11.0 23.6 12.8                                23.1        11.0
     1988   45      602.4 602.8 527.8 527.8                      .96       .96            1.4       1.4     22.9 13.9 22.2 12.2 22.9 13.9                                22.2        12.2
     1993   50      717.8 723.8 639.2 644.2                      .79       .75            1.1       1.1     23.6 14.8 22.8 13.3 24.7 15.0                                23.8        13.4
     1998   55      844.8 850.8 761.4 766.4                      .69       .69            1.1       1.1     25.9 15.9 24.9 14.3 25.9 16.0                                24.9        14.4

     a
       100 largest: Average height and d.b.h. of the 100 largest trees per acre (estimated from d.b.h. and HT-d.b.h. curves).
     b
       QMD: Quadratic mean diameter at breast height.
     c
       Volume: All volumes are total stem cubic (CVTS) or merchantable cubic to a 15.25-cm top diameter (CV6), inside bark.
     d
       d/D: Average d.b.h. cut : average d.b.h. before thinning.
     e
       Cumulative yield: net = standing + thinning; gross = standing + thinning + mortality; yield does not include any volume removed in a Calibration cut. Volume (CVTS)
     removed in thinnings = 162.0 cubic meters (41 percent of the total gross yield at the time of the last thinning). Volume (CVTS) in mortality = 6.0 cubic meters (1 percent
     of the total gross yield).
     Table 20a—Stand development table for treatment 3, per-acre basis (plots 7, 11, and 21)

                                                 After thinning                                                 Removed in thinning                                                              Mortality
                       40 largesta                                      Volumec                                       Volume                      Avg. volume                                                  Volume
            Stand                                                Basal                                         Basal                                                                               Basal
     Year   age        HT      D.b.h. Trees         QMDb         area CVTS CV6                   Trees      QMD area CVTS CV6                     CVTS CV6            d/Dd    Trees      QMD       area      CVTS       CV6
                                                                   2              3                                      2                    3                                                        2            3
            Yr        Ft         In  No.            In           Ft    - - - Ft       ----       No.         In      Ft - - - - - - - Ft - - - - - - - - - -                     No.      In         Ft      - - - Ft - - -
     1963   20       38          7.2 343              5.1       49.0    750             74        0           0.0     0.0   0         0      0.0       0.0            0.00        0       0.0        0.0         0      0
     1966   23       49          9.3 252              6.9       64.2 1208              458       90           6.5    20.7 388      111       4.3       2.3             .96        2       4.1         .2         2      0
     1970   27       61         11.9 175              9.3       81.6 1931             1361       77           8.5    29.9 710      440       9.2       6.6             .94        0         .0        .0         0      0
     1973   30       71         13.5 140            11.0        92.3 2529             2106       35         10.0     18.9 503      384     14.4 12.0                   .92        0         .0        .0         0      0
     1975   32       77         14.3 123            12.1        97.5 2869             2518       17         11.1     11.3 328      273     19.3 16.1                   .93        0         .0        .0         0      0
     1979   36       89         15.9 102            14.0       107.5 3616             3329       22         12.6     18.7 623      553     28.3 25.1                   .92        0         .0        .0         0      0
     1983   40       98         17.5 102            15.6       132.9 4913             4607        0            .0      .0   0         0        .0        .0            .00        0         .0        .0         0      0
     1988   45      111         19.4 102            17.2       163.0 6700             6348        0            .0      .0   0         0        .0        .0            .00        0         .0        .0         0      0
     1993   50      124         21.1 100            18.8       190.6 8597             8189        0             .0     .0   0         0        .0        .0            .00        2      10.2         .9       38     30
     1998   55      133         22.5  98            20.1       214.1 10223            9766        0            .0      .0   0         0        .0        .0            .00        2       9.3         .8       30     22

                            Cumulative yielde                    QMD growth             BA growth               Net volume growth                   Gross volume growth
                       Net  Gross Net               Gross                                              CVTS CVTS CV6                    CV6       CVTS CVTS           CV6     CV6
                       CVTS CVTS CV6                CV6          Net      Surv.        Net       Gross PAI MAI PAI                      MAI       PAI   MAI           PAI     MAI
                - - - - - - - - - Ft 3 - - - - - - - - - - -     - - - - -In - - - - - - - - Ft 2 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Ft 3 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     1963   20    750         750          74          74         .00          .00        .0         .0    0       38          0         4         0       38           0           4
     1966   23 1595         1598         569         569          .55          .55    12.0        12.0 282         69       165         25 283             69        165          25
     1970   27 3028 3031 1912 1912                                .55          .55    11.8        11.8 358       112        336         71 358           112         336          71
     1973   30 4129         4132       3041        3041           .52          .52      9.9        9.9 367       138        376       101 367            138         376        101
     1975   32 4798         4801       3726        3726           .47          .47      8.3        8.3 334       150        342       116 334            150         342        116
     1979   36 6167         6170       5090        5090           .42          .42      7.2        7.2 342       171        341       141 342            171         341        141
     1983   40 7464         7467       6368        6368           .39          .39      6.3        6.3 324       187        319       159 324            187         319        159
     1988   45 9252         9254       8109        8109           .33          .33      6.0        6.0 357       206        348       180 357            206         348        180
     1993   50 11149 11189 9950                    9980           .31          .29      5.5        5.7 379       223        368       199 387            224         374        200
     1998   55 12775 12845 11527 11579                            .26          .24      4.7        4.9 325       232        315       210 331            234         320        211

     a
       40 largest: Average height and d.b.h. of the 40 largest trees per acre (estimated from d.b.h. and HT-d.b.h. curves).
     b
       QMD: Quadratic mean diameter at breast height.
     c
       Volume: All volumes are total stem cubic (CVTS) or merchantable cubic to a 6-in top diameter (CV6), inside bark.
     d
       d/D: Average d.b.h. cut : average d.b.h. before thinning.
     e
       Cumulative yield: net = standing + thinning; gross = standing + thinning + mortality; yield does not include any volume removed in a Calibration cut. Volume (CVTS)
     removed in thinnings = 2552 cubic feet (41 percent of the total gross yield at the time of the last thinning). Volume (CVTS) in mortality = 70 cubic feet (1 percent of the
     total gross yield).




67
68
     Table 20b—Stand development table for treatment 3, per-hectare basis (plots 7, 11, and 21)

                                                  After thinning                                               Removed in thinning                                                                 Mortality
                        100 largesta                                    Volumec                                      Volume                       Avg. volume                                                   Volume
            Stand                                                Basal                                         Basal                                                                                 Basal
     Year   age        HT       D.b.h. Trees         QMDb        area CVTS CV6                 Trees       QMD area CVTS CV6                      CVTS CV6           d/Dd     Trees        QMD       area      CVTS       CV6
                                                                   2            3                                       2                     3                                                          2            3
            Yr         m        Cm    No.            Cm           m      ---m ---              No.         Cm         m --------m ---------                                      No.       Cm          m       ---m ---
     1963   20        12.1       18.3 848            13.1        11.3     53.0    5.7            0          0.0       0.0  0.0  0.0 0.0  0.0                          0.00        0          0.0       0.0       0.0 0.0
     1966   23        15.3       23.6 622            17.5        14.8     85.0  32.5           222         16.5       4.8 27.6  8.2  .1   .1                           .96        4         10.4        .0      0.7  0.5
     1970   27        19.2       30.1 432            23.6        18.8    135.7  95.8           189         21.5       6.9 50.2 31.3  .3   .2                           .94        0           .0        .0        .0  .0
     1973   30        22.3       34.2 346            28.1        21.2    177.5 147.9            86         25.3       4.3 35.7 27.4  .4   .3                           .92        0           .0        .0        .0  .0
     1975   32        24.1       36.3 305            30.8        22.4    201.3 176.7            41         28.3       2.6 23.5 19.6  .6   .5                           .93        0           .0        .0        .0  .0
     1979   36        27.7       40.4 251            35.6        24.7    253.6 233.6            54         32.0       4.3 44.1 39.2  .8   .7                           .92        0           .0        .0        .0  .0
     1983   40        30.5       44.5 251            39.6        30.6    344.4 323.0             0           .0        .0   .0   .0  .0   .0                           .00        0           .0        .0        .0  .0
     1988   45        34.4       49.4 251            43.8        37.5    469.5 444.9             0           .0        .0   .0   .0  .0   .0                           .00        0           .0        .0        .0  .0
     1993   50        38.2       53.7 247            47.8        43.8    602.3 573.7             0           .0        .0   .0   .0  .0   .0                           .00        4         26.0        .2       3.1 2.6
     1998   55        41.0       57.1 243            51.0        49.2    716.1 684.1             0           .0        .0   .0   .0  .0   .0                           .00        4         23.7        .2       2.6 2.0

                             Cumulative yielde                   QMD growth            BA growth               Net volume growth                      Gross volume growth
                    Net         Gross      Net       Gross                                           CVTS CVTS CV6                     CV6        CVTS CVTS            CV6       CV6
                    CVTS        CVTS       CV6       CV6         Net       Surv.       Net     Gross PAI MAI PAI                       MAI        PAI  MAI             PAI       MAI
                    - - - - - - - - - - m3 - - - - - - - - - -    - - - - -Cm - - -   - - - - m2 - - - -    - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - m3 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     1963   20        53.0        53.0        5.7         5.7     0.00       0.00       0.0       0.0        0.0       3.1       0.0       0.8     0.0       3.1         0.0        0.8
     1966   23      112.2 112.3             40.3        40.3      1.40       1.39       2.8       2.8      20.2        5.4 12.0            2.2 20.3          5.4       12.0         2.2
     1970   27      212.5 212.7 134.4 134.4                       1.39       1.39       2.7       2.7      25.6        8.4 24.0            5.5 25.6          8.4       24.0         5.5
     1973   30      289.6 289.7 213.4 213.4                       1.31       1.31       2.3       2.3      26.2 10.1 26.8                  7.6 26.2 10.1               26.8         7.6
     1975   32      336.4 336.5 261.3 261.3                       1.21       1.21       1.9       1.9      23.9 11.0 24.5                   8.6 23.9 11.0              24.5         8.6
     1979   36      432.2 432.4 356.8 356.8                       1.06       1.06       1.6       1.6      24.5 12.5 24.4 10.4 24.5 12.5                               24.4        10.4
     1983   40      523.0 523.2 446.2 446.2                       1.00       1.00       1.5       1.5      23.2 13.6 22.9 11.6 23.2 13.6                               22.9        11.6
     1988   45      648.1 648.3 568.1 568.1                         .85       .85       1.4       1.4      25.5 14.9 24.9 13.1 25.5 14.9                               24.9        13.1
     1993   50      780.9 783.8 697.0 699.1                         .78       .74       1.3       1.3      27.1 16.1 26.3 14.4 27.6 16.2                               26.7        14.5
     1998   55      894.7 899.7 807.4 811.0                         .65       .60       1.1       1.1      23.3 16.8 22.6 15.2 23.7 16.8                               22.0        15.2

     a
       100 largest: Average height and d.b.h. of the 100 largest trees per acre (estimated from d.b.h. and HT-d.b.h. curves).
     b
       QMD: Quadratic mean diameter at breast height.
     c
       Volume: All volumes are total stem cubic (CVTS) or merchantable cubic to a 15.25-cm top diameter (CV6), inside bark.
     d
       d/D: Average d.b.h. cut : average d.b.h. before thinning.
     e
       Cumulative yield: net = standing + thinning; gross = standing + thinning + mortality; yield does not include any volume removed in a Calibration cut. Volume (CVTS)
     removed in thinnings = 178.6 cubic meters (41 percent of the total gross yield at the time of the last thinning). Volume (CVTS) in mortality = 4.9 cubic meters (1 percent
     of the total gross yield).
     Table 21a—Stand development table for treatment 4, per-acre basis (plots 5, 18, and 23)

                                                After thinning                                               Removed in thinning                                                             Mortality
                       40 largesta                                  Volumec                                       Volume                        Avg. volume                                                Volume
            Stand                                            Basal                                         Basal                                                                               Basal
     Year   age       HT      D.b.h. Trees        QMDb       area CVTS CV6                   Trees      QMD area CVTS CV6                       CVTS CV6          d/Dd     Trees     QMD       area      CVTS       CV6
                                                               2               3                                     2                      3                                                      2            3
            Yr        Ft       In   No.            In        Ft    - - - Ft - - -            No.         In       Ft - - - - - - - - Ft         ---------                     No.     In         Ft      - - - Ft - - -
     1963   20       40         7.1 333            5.3      50.4    748         80            0          0.0       0.0   0         0             0.0  0.0         0.00         0      0.0        0.0         0      0
     1966   23       51         9.1 243            7.1      65.6 1243         523            87          6.7      21.0 389      126              4.5  2.2          .96         3      4.1         .3         4      0
     1970   27       64        11.7 180            9.5      87.0 2074       1516             63          8.6      25.7 609      401              9.7  7.0          .94         0        .0        .0         0      0
     1973   30       73        13.3 160           11.1     105.5 2891       2422             20         10.3      11.6 307      243             15.4 12.1          .95         0        .0        .0         0      0
     1975   32       79        14.2 145           12.1     115.8 3446       3036             15          9.4       7.2 209      150             13.9 10.0          .79         0        .0        .0         0      0
     1979   36       90        16.0 138           13.7     140.2 4725       4324              7         11.8       5.1 172      149             24.6 21.3          .87         0        .0        .0         0      0
     1983   40      101        17.6 138           15.0     168.5 6339       5905              0           .0        .0   0         0              .0   .0          .00         0        .0        .0         0      0
     1988   45      113        19.3 133           16.6     197.0 8213       7746              0           .0        .0   0         0              .0   .0          .00         5      8.1        1.8       61     34
     1993   50      125        20.6 128           17.7     218.1 9985       9472              0           .0        .0   0         0              .0   .0          .00         5     14.7        5.9      264 242
     1998   55      135        21.8 122           19.0     237.2 11579 11040                  0           .0        .0   0         0              .0   .0          .00         7     13.3        6.4     299 261

                            Cumulative yielde                QMD growth              BA growth               Net volume growth                     Gross volume growth
                      Net  Gross Net              Gross                                            CVTS CVTS CV6                    CV6         CVTS CVTS         CV6      CV6
                      CVTS CVTS CV6               CV6        Net       Surv.       Net       Gross PAI MAI PAI                      MAI         PAI  MAI          PAI      MAI
                 - - - - - - - - Ft3 - - - - - - - - -      - - - - -In - - - -    - - - - Ft2 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Ft3 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     1963   20    748        748          80          80     0.00         0.00        0.0        0.0    0       37          0         4        0       37           0           4
     1966   23 1632         1637        649         649        .56         .56      12.1       12.2 295         71       190         28 296            71        190          28
     1970   27 3072 3076 2043 2043                             .55         .55      11.8       11.8 360       114        348         76 360           114        348          76
     1973   30 4196         4200       3191       3191         .51         .51      10.0       10.0 375       140        383       106 375            140        383         106
     1975   32 4960         4964       3956       3956         .44         .44        8.8        8.8 382      155        382       124 382            155        382         124
     1979   36 6410         6414       5393       5393         .36         .36        7.4        7.4 363      178        359       150 363            178        359         150
     1983   40 8024         8028       6974       6974         .33         .33        7.1        7.1 404      201        395       174 404            201        395         174
     1988   45 9899         9964       8815       8849         .31         .27        5.7        6.1 375      220        368       196 387            221        375         197
     1993   50 11670 11999 10541 10817                         .23         .23        4.2        5.4 354      233        345       211 407            240        394        216
     1998   55 13264 13893 12109 12647                         .25         .21        3.8        5.1 319      241        314       220 379            253        366        230

     a
       40 largest: Average height and d.b.h. of the 40 largest trees per acre (estimated from d.b.h. and HT-d.b.h. curves).
     b
       QMD: Quadratic mean diameter at breast height.
     c
       Volume: All volumes are total stem cubic (CVTS) or merchantable cubic to a 6-in top diameter (CV6), inside bark.
     d
       d/D: Average d.b.h. cut : average d.b.h. before thinning.
     e
       Cumulative yield: net = standing + thinning; gross = standing + thinning + mortality; yield does not include any volume removed in a Calibration cut. Volume (CVTS)
     removed in thinnings = 1685 cubic feet (26 percent of the total gross yield at the time of the last thinning). Volume (CVTS) in mortality = 629 cubic feet (5 percent of the
     total gross yield).




69
70
     Table 21b—Stand development table for treatment 4, per-hectare basis (plots 5, 18, and 23)

                                                  After thinning                                                 Removed in thinning                                                                 Mortality
                       100 largesta                                    Volumec                                         Volume                       Avg. volume                                                   Volume
            Stand                                               Basal                                            Basal                                                                                 Basal
     Year   age       HT       D.b.h. Trees         QMDb        area CVTS CV6                     Trees      QMD area CVTS CV6                      CVTS CV6           d/Dd     Trees        QMD       area      CVTS       CV6
                                                                  2                 3                                      2                    3                                                          2            3
            Yr        m        Cm    No.            Cm           m      ----m ----               No.         Cm         m       -------m ---------                                No.        Cm          m       ---m ---
     1963   20       12.6       18.0 823            13.5        11.6     52.9   6.1                0          0.0       0.0      0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0                     0.00        0          0.0       0.0       0.0  0.0
     1966   23       16.0       23.1 601            18.0        15.1     87.5  37.1              214         17.0       4.8     27.7  9.3   .1   .1                      .96        8         10.4        .1       0.8  0.5
     1970   27       19.9       29.6 445            24.1        20.0    145.7 106.6              156         21.9       5.9     43.1 28.5   .3   .2                      .94        0           .0        .0        .0   .0
     1973   30       22.8       33.8 395            28.1        24.3    202.8 170.0               49         26.3       2.7     22.0 17.5   .4   .3                      .94        0           .0        .0        .0   .0
     1975   32       24.6       36.1 358            30.9        26.6    241.7 213.0               37         23.9       1.7     15.1 11.0   .4   .3                      .79        0           .0        .0        .0   .0
     1979   36       28.0       40.7 342            34.9        32.2    331.2 303.3               16         30.0       1.2     12.5 11.0   .8   .6                      .87        0           .0        .0        .0   .0
     1983   40       31.3       44.8 342            38.2        38.8    444.2 413.8                0           .0        .0       .0   .0   .0   .0                      .00        0           .0        .0        .0   .0
     1988   45       34.9       48.9 329            42.1        45.3    575.4 542.7                0           .0        .0       .0   .0   .0   .0                      .00       12         20.7        .4       4.8  2.9
     1993   50       38.8       52.4 317            45.1        50.2    699.4 663.5                0           .0        .0       .0   .0   .0   .0                      .00       12         37.3       1.3      19.0 17.5
     1998   55       41.7       55.3 301            48.2        54.6    811.0 773.3                0           .0        .0       .0   .0   .0   .0                      .00       16         33.7       1.5      21.5 18.8

                             Cumulative yield e                 QMD growth               BA growth               Net volume growth                       Gross volume growth
                      Net  Gross          Net       Gross                                               CVTS          CVTS CV6           CV6        CVTS CVTS          CV6      CV6
                      CVTS CVTS           CV6       CV6          Net       Surv.          Net     Gross PAI           MAI PAI            MAI        PAI  MAI           PAI      MAI
                     - - - - - - - - m3 - - - - - - - - - - -     - - - - -Cm - -       - - - - m2 - - - -    - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - m3 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     1963   20       52.9        52.9        6.1         6.1     0.00       0.00          0.0        0.0       0.0       3.1       0.0       0.8     0.0       3.1         0.0        0.8
     1966   23      114.8 115.1            45.9        45.9      1.43       1.42          2.8        2.8     21.1        5.5 13.8            2.5 21.2          5.5       13.8         2.5
     1970   27      215.5 215.8 143.5 143.5                      1.39       1.39          2.7        2.7     25.7        8.5 24.9            5.8 25.7          8.5       24.9         5.8
     1973   30      294.2 294.5 223.9 223.9                      1.29       1.29          2.3        2.3     26.7 10.3 27.3                  7.9 26.7 10.3               27.3         7.9
     1975   32      347.7 348.0 277.4 277.4                      1.12       1.12          2.0        2.0     27.2 11.3 27.2                  9.2 27.2 11.4               27.2         9.2
     1979   36      449.2 449.5 378.0 378.0                       .92        .92          1.7        1.7     25.9 13.0 25.6 11.0 25.9 13.0                               25.6        11.0
     1983   40      562.2 562.5 488.7 488.7                       .84        .84          1.6        1.6     28.7 14.5 28.2 12.7 28.7 14.5                               28.2        12.7
     1988   45      693        697        617.6 619.9             .78        .67          1.3        1.4     26.7 15.9 26.3 14.2 27.6 16.0                               26.8        14.3
     1993   50      817.4 840.4 738.4 757.7                       .59        .57          1.0        1.2     25.3 16.8 24.7 15.3 29.0 17.3                               28.1        15.6
     1998   55      929.0 973.0 848.2 885.8                       .63        .53            .9       1.2     22.8 17.4 22.5 15.9 27.0 18.2                               26.1        16.6

     a
       100 largest: Average height and d.b.h. of the 100 largest trees per acre (estimated from d.b.h. and HT-d.b.h. curves).
     b
       QMD: Quadratic mean diameter at breast height.
     c
       Volume: All volumes are total stem cubic (CVTS) or merchantable cubic to a 15.25-cm top diameter (CV6), inside bark.
     d
       d/D: Average d.b.h. cut : average d.b.h. before thinning.
     e
       Cumulative yield: net = standing + thinning; gross = standing + thinning + mortality; yield does not include any volume removed in a Calibration cut. Volume (CVTS)
     removed in thinnings = 118.0 cubic meters (26 percent of the total gross yield at the time of the last thinning). Volume (CVTS) in mortality = 44.0 cubic meters (5 percent
     of the total gross yield).
     Table 22a—Stand development table for treatment 5, per-acre basis (plots 9, 24, and 27)

                                                 After thinning                                                Removed in thinning                                                                Mortality
                       40 largesta                                    Volumec                                       Volume                         Avg. volume                                                  Volume
            Stand                                              Basal                                         Basal                                                                                  Basal
     Year   age       HT       D.b.h. Trees         QMDb       area CVTS CV6                   Trees      QMD area CVTS CV6                        CVTS CV6           d/Dd     Trees      QMD       area      CVTS       CV6
                                                                 2             3                                        2                      3                                                        2            3
            Yr        Ft         In  No.              In       Ft    - - - Ft - - -            No.         In       Ft - - - - - - - - Ft          ---------                      No.      In         Ft      - - - Ft - - -
     1963   20       39          6.8 365             5.0      49.2    729         44            0          0.0       0.0   0         0              0.0  0.0           0.00        0       0.0        0.0         0      0
     1966   23       50          8.9 312             6.7      74.9 1385         473            52          6.3      11.1 201       45               3.9  1.5            .95        2       5.4         .3         4      0
     1970   27       62         11.4 250             8.7     103.6 2438       1609             62          8.2      22.9 528      309               8.5  5.4            .96        0         .0        .0         0      0
     1973   30       71         13.0 213            10.2     121.1 3285       2597             35          9.3      16.5 440      310              12.6  9.4            .92        2       7.6         .5       13       6
     1975   32       78         13.8 193            11.1     130.4 3857       3243             18          9.9       9.8 289      222              16.1 13.1            .90        2       8.0         .6       16       9
     1979   36       89         15.6 170            12.6     147.9 4977       4435             23         11.4      16.4 561      480              24.4 20.9            .91        0         .0        .0         0      0
     1983   40      101         17.3 165            14.0     175.4 6625       6074              0           .0        .0   0         0               .0   .0            .00        5      10.0        2.7       98     78
     1988   45      113         19.0 162            15.3     207.4 8663       8079              0           .0        .0   0         0               .0   .0            .00        3       5.5         .5       14       1
     1993   50      127         20.4 153            16.7     233.6 10827 10215                  0           .0        .0   0         0               .0   .0            .00        8       9.1        3.8      148 104
     1998   55      133         21.4 145            17.8     250.1 12109 11491                  0           .0        .0   0         0               .0   .0            .00        7      10.6        4.1     187 150

                           Cumulative yielde                   QMD growth              BA growth                Net volume growth                     Gross volume growth
                      Net  Gross Net                Gross                                            CVTS CVTS CV6                      CV6        CVTS CVTS          CV6      CV6
                      CVTS CVTS CV6                 CV6        Net        Surv.       Net      Gross PAI MAI PAI                        MAI        PAI  MAI           PAI      MAI
                - - - - - - - - - Ft 3 - - - - - - - - - -     - - - - -In - - - -    - - - - Ft 2 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Ft 3 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     1963   20   729         729          44          44       0.00        0.00        0.0        0.0       0       36          0         2         0       36           0           2
     1966   23 1586        1590          518        518         .54         .54      12.3       12.3 286            69       158         23 287             69        158          23
     1970   27 3167 3171 1963 1963                              .50         .50      12.9       12.9 395          117        361         73 395           117         361          73
     1973   30 4454        4472        3260        3266         .45         .45      11.3       11.5 429          148        433       109 434            149         435        109
     1975   32 5314        5348        4128        4142         .41         .40        9.5        9.8 430         166        434       129 438            167         438        129
     1979   36 6995        7029        5799        5814         .34         .34        8.5        8.5 420         194        418       161 420            195         418        161
     1983   40 8643        8775        7439        7531         .33         .32        6.9        7.6 412         216        410       186 436            219         429        188
     1988   45 10682 10828 9443                    9537         .27         .25        6.4        6.5 408         237        401       210 411            241         401        212
     1993   50 12846 13139 11580 11777                          .28         .22        5.2        6.0 433         257        427       232 462            263         448        236
     1998   55 14127 14608 12855 13203                          .22         .17        3.3        4.1 256         257        255       234 294            266         285        240

     a
       40 largest: Average height and d.b.h. of the 40 largest trees per acre (estimated from d.b.h. and HT-d.b.h. curves).
     b
       QMD: Quadratic mean diameter at breast height.
     c
       Volume: All volumes are total stem cubic (CVTS) or merchantable cubic to a 6-in top diameter (CV6), inside bark.
     d
       d/D: Average d.b.h. cut : average d.b.h. before thinning.
     e
       Cumulative yield: net = standing + thinning; gross = standing + thinning + mortality; yield does not include any volume removed in a Calibration cut. Volume (CVTS)
     removed in thinnings = 2018 cubic feet (29 percent of the total gross yield at the time of the last thinning). Volume (CVTS) in mortality = 480 cubic feet (3 percent of the
     total gross yield).




71
72
     Table 22b—Stand development table for treatment 5, per-hectare basis (plots 9, 24, and 27)

                                                  After thinning                                               Removed in thinning                                                                Mortality
                       100 largesta                                        Volumec                                             Volume             Avg. volume                                                  Volume
            Stand                                               Basal                                         Basal                                                                                 Basal
     Year   age       HT       D.b.h. Trees         QMDb        area CVTS            CV6       Trees       QMD area CVTS               CV6        CVTS CV6           d/Dd     Trees        QMD      area      CVTS       CV6
                                                                  2            3                                         2                    3                                                         2            3
            Yr        m        Cm    No.            Cm           m      ---m -----            No.          Cm         m --------m ---------                                      No.       Cm         m       ---m ---
     1963   20       12.5       17.2 902            12.7        11.3     51.5   3.5             0           0.0       0.0  0.0  0.0 0.0  0.0                          0.00        0         0.0       0.0       0.0  0.0
     1966   23       15.6       22.6 770            16.9        17.2     97.4  33.6           128          15.9       2.5 14.5  3.6  .1   .0                           .95        4        13.8        .1       0.8  0.5
     1970   27       19.4       28.9 618            22.2        23.8    171.1 113.2           152          21.0       5.3 37.5 22.1  .2   .2                           .96        0          .0        .0        .0   .0
     1973   30       22.2       33.0 527            26.0        27.8    230.5 182.3            86          23.7       3.8 31.3 22.2  .4   .3                           .92        4        19.4        .1       1.4  0.9
     1975   32       24.3       35.1 478            28.3        30.0    270.5 227.5            45          25.1       2.2 20.7 16.0  .4   .4                           .90        4        20.4        .1       1.6  1.1
     1979   36       27.6       39.7 420            32.1        34.0    348.9 310.9            58          28.9       3.8 39.7 34.1  .7   .6                           .91        0          .0        .0        .0   .0
     1983   40       31.3       43.8 408            35.5        40.3    464.2 425.7             0            .0        .0   .0   .0  .0   .0                           .00       12        25.3        .6       7.4  6.0
     1988   45       35.0       48.1 399            39.0        47.7    606.9 566.0             0            .0        .0   .0   .0  .0   .0                           .00        8        13.9        .1       1.5  0.5
     1993   50       39.2       51.8 379            42.5        53.7    758.4 715.6             0            .0        .0   .0   .0  .0   .0                           .00       21        23.2        .9      10.8  7.8
     1998   55       41.1       54.5 358            45.3        57.5    848.1 804.9             0            .0        .0   .0   .0  .0   .0                           .00       16        27.0        .9      13.6 11.0

                          Cumulative yielde                     QMD growth            BA growth                Net volume growth                      Gross volume growth
                      Net  Gross           Net      Gross                                             CVTS CVTS               CV6      CV6        CVTS       CVTS CV6           CV6
                      CVTS CVTS            CV6      CV6          Net     Surv.        Net       Gross PAI  MAI                PAI      MAI        PAI        MAI  PAI           MAI
                     - - - - - - - - m3 - - - - - - - - - - -    - - - - -Cm - - -    - - - - m2 - - - -    - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - m3 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     1963   20       51.5        51.5        3.5         3.5     0.00      0.00        0.0        0.0        0.0       3.1       0.0       0.7     0.0       3.1         0.0        0.7
     1966   23      111.5 111.8            36.7        36.7      1.37      1.37        2.8        2.8      20.5        5.3 11.6            2.1 20.6          5.3       11.6         2.1
     1970   27      222.2 222.5 137.9 137.9                      1.27      1.27        3.0        3.0      28.2        8.7 25.8            5.6 28.2          8.7       25.8         5.6
     1973   30      312.3 313.5 228.7 229.2                      1.15      1.15        2.6        2.6      30.5 10.9 30.8                  8.1 30.9 10.9               30.9         8.1
     1975   32      372.5 374.9 289.4 290.5                      1.04      1.02        2.2        2.3      30.6 12.1 30.9                  9.5 31.2 12.2               31.2         9.6
     1979   36      490.2 492.5 406.4 407.5                       .87       .87        2.0        2.0      29.9 14.1 29.7 11.8 29.9 14.2                               29.7        11.8
     1983   40      605.5 614.7 521.2 527.7                       .85       .80        1.6        1.7      29.3 15.6 29.2 13.5 31.0 15.9                               30.6        13.7
     1988   45      748.2 758.4 661.5 668.1                       .70       .64        1.5        1.5      29.0 17.1 28.6 15.2 29.2 17.3                               28.6        15.3
     1993   50      899.7 920.3 811.1 824.9                       .70       .56        1.2        1.4      30.8 18.5 30.4 16.7 32.9 18.9                               31.9        17.0
     1998   55      989.4 1023.0 900.4 924.7                      .55       .42          .8       1.0      18.4 18.5 18.4 16.6 21.1 19.1                               20.5        17.3

     a
       100 largest: Average height and d.b.h. of the 100 largest trees per acre (estimated from d.b.h. and HT-d.b.h. curves).
     b
       QMD: Quadratic mean diameter at breast height.
     c
       Volume: All volumes are total stem cubic (CVTS) or merchantable cubic to a 15.25-cm top diameter (CV6), inside bark.
     d
       d/D: Average d.b.h. cut : average d.b.h. before thinning.
     e
       Cumulative yield: net = standing + thinning; gross = standing + thinning + mortality; yield does not include any volume removed in a Calibration cut. Volume (CVTS)
     removed in thinnings = 141.3 cubic meters (29 percent of the total gross yield at the time of the last thinning). Volume (CVTS) in mortality = 33.6 cubic meters (3 percent
     of the total gross yield).
     Table 23a—Stand development table for treatment 6, per-acre basis (plots 1, 2, and 25)

                                                After thinning                                                 Removed in thinning                                                               Mortality
                       40 largesta                                   Volumec                                        Volume                        Avg. volume                                                  Volume
            Stand                                             Basal                                           Basal                                                                                Basal
     Year   age       HT       D.b.h. Trees        QMDb       area CVTS CV6                    Trees      QMD area CVTS CV6                       CVTS CV6           d/Dd     Trees      QMD       area      CVTS       CV6
                                                                 2             3                                       2                      3                                                         2           3
            Yr        Ft        In       No.        In        Ft    - - - Ft - - -              No.        In       Ft - - - - - - - - Ft         ---------                       No.     In         Ft      - - - Ft - - -
     1963   20       40          7.0     338        5.2      49.9    741         66              0         0.0       0.0   0         0             0.0  0.0           0.00         0      0.0        0.0        0      0
     1966   23       49          9.1     283        7.0      75.1 1375         536              55         6.6      12.9 232       67              4.2  1.9            .95         0        .0        .0        0      0
     1970   27       62         11.6     210        9.3      97.8 2278       1623               73         8.6      29.6 680      436              9.3  6.4            .95         0        .0        .0        0      0
     1973   30       71         13.3     168       10.9     108.3 2912       2419               42        10.1      23.2 612      477             14.6 11.9            .94         0        .0        .0        0      0
     1975   32       77         14.2     142       12.0     111.6 3252       2858               27        10.3      15.5 447      356             16.6 13.2            .88         0        .0        .0        0      0
     1979   36       88         16.0     110       13.9     114.9 3795       3495               32        12.8      28.1 928      833             29.0 27.8            .94         0        .0        .0        0      0
     1983   40       98         17.6     110       15.5     143.0 5223       4902                0          .0        .0   0         0              .0   .0            .00         0        .0        .0        0      0
     1988   45      110         19.4     110       17.1     175.4 7118       6748                0          .0        .0   0         0              .0   .0            .00         0        .0        .0        0      0
     1993   50      123         21.0     105       18.6     198.1 8904       8487                0          .0        .0   0         0              .0   .0            .00         5     15.1        6.2     276 253
     1998   55      133         22.5     105       19.8     224.5 10806 10323                    0          .0        .0   0         0              .0   .0            .00         0        .0        .0        0      0

                           Cumulative yielde                  QMD growth               BA growth                Net volume growth                     Gross volume growth
                      Net  Gross Net               Gross                                             CVTS CVTS CV6                     CV6        CVTS CVTS          CV6      CV6
                      CVTS CVTS CV6                CV6        Net      Surv.        Net        Gross PAI MAI PAI                       MAI        PAI  MAI           PAI      MAI
                 - - - - - - - - Ft 3 - - - - - - - - -       - - - - -In - - - -    - - - - Ft 2 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Ft 3 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     1963   20    741        741           66          66      0.00        0.00        0.0         0.0     0       37          0         3         0       37           0           3
     1966   23 1607        1607          603         603         .57         .57     12.7        12.7 289          70       179         26 289             70        179          26
     1970   27 3190 3190 2127 2127                               .53         .53     13.1        13.1 396        118        381         79 396           118         381          79
     1973   30 4436        4436        3400        3400          .49         .49     11.2        11.2 415        148        424       113 415            148         424        113
     1975   32 5223        5223        4195        4195          .45         .45       9.4         9.4 394       163        398       131 394            163         398        131
     1979   36 6694        6694        5665        5665          .40         .40       7.9         7.9 368       186        367       157 368            186         367        157
     1983   40 8122        8122        7072        7072          .40         .40       7.0         7.0 357       203        352       177 357            203         352        177
     1988   45 10017 10017 8918                    8918         .33          .33       6.5         6.5 379       223        369       198 379            223         369        198
     1993   50 11803 12079 10657 10910                          .30          .28       4.5         5.8 357       236        348       213 412            242         398        218
     1998   55 13705 13981 12493 12746                          .24          .24       5.3         5.3 380       249        367       227 380            254         367        232

     a
       40 largest: Average height and d.b.h. of the 40 largest trees per acre (estimated from d.b.h. and HT-d.b.h. curves).
     b
       QMD: Quadratic mean diameter at breast height.
     c
       Volume: All volumes are total stem cubic (CVTS) or merchantable cubic to a 6-in top diameter (CV6), inside bark.
     d
       d/D: Average d.b.h. cut : average d.b.h. before thinning.
     e
       Cumulative yield: net = standing + thinning; gross = standing + thinning + mortality; yield does not include any volume removed in a Calibration cut. Volume (CVTS)
     removed in thinnings = 2899 cubic feet (43 percent of the total gross yield at the time of the last thinning). Volume (CVTS) in mortality = 276 cubic feet (2 percent of the
     total gross yield).




73
74
     Table 23b—Stand development table for treatment 6, per-hectare basis (plots 1, 2, and 25)

                                                  After thinning                                                  Removed in thinning                                                                Mortality
                       100 largesta                                         Volumec                                               Volume            Avg. volume                                                   Volume
            Stand                                               Basal                                             Basal                                                                                Basal
     Year   age       HT       D.b.h. Trees         QMDb        area CVTS                CV6       Trees      QMD area CVTS               CV6       CVTS CV6            d/Dd     Trees        QMD      area      CVTS       CV6
                                                                  2                  3                                     2                    3                                                          2            3
            Yr        m        Cm    No.            Cm           m       ----m ----               No.          Cm        m   -------m ---------                                     No.       Cm         m       ---m ---
     1963   20       12.6       17.8 836            13.2        11.5      52.4   5.1                0          0.0       0.0  0.0   0.0 0.0  0.0                         0.00        0         0.0       0.0      0.0  0.0
     1966   23       15.4       23.1 700            17.7        17.3      96.8  38.0              136         16.7       3.0 16.7   5.2  .1   .1                          .95        0          .0        .0       .0   .0
     1970   27       19.3       29.5 519            23.5        22.5     159.9 114.1              181         21.9       6.8 48.1 31.1   .3   .2                          .95        0          .0        .0       .0   .0
     1973   30       22.2       33.8 416            27.7        24.9     204.3 169.8              103         25.7       5.3 43.3 33.9   .4   .3                          .94        0          .0        .0       .0   .0
     1975   32       23.9       36.0 350            30.6        25.7     228.1 200.6               66         26.3       3.6 31.8 25.4   .5   .4                          .88        0          .0        .0       .0   .0
     1979   36       27.3       40.6 272            35.3        26.4     266.2 245.1               78         32.5       6.5 65.4 58.8   .8   .8                          .94        0          .0        .0       .0   .0
     1983   40       30.4       44.6 272            39.3        32.9     366.1 343.7                0           .0        .0   .0    .0  .0   .0                          .00        0          .0        .0       .0   .0
     1988   45       34.0       49.4 272            43.5        40.4     498.8 472.9                0           .0        .0   .0    .0  .0   .0                          .00        0          .0        .0       .0   .0
     1993   50       38.0       53.4 259            47.4        45.6     623.8 594.6                0           .0        .0   .0    .0  .0   .0                          .00       12        38.3       1.4     19.8 18.2
     1998   55       41.2       57.1 259            50.4        51.6     756.9 723.1                0           .0        .0   .0    .0  .0   .0                          .00        0          .0        .0       .0   .0

                           Cumulative yielde                    QMD growth                BA growth               Net volume growth                     Gross volume growth
                      Net  Gross Net                Gross                                                CVTS CVTS               CV6       CV6      CVTS CVTS           CV6        CV6
                      CVTS CVTS CV6                 CV6         Net       Surv.           Net      Gross PAI  MAI                PAI       MAI      PAI   MAI           PAI        MAI
                     - - - - - - - m3 - - - - - - - - - - - -    - - - - -Cm - - -       - - - - m2 - - - -    - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - m3 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     1963   20       52.4        52.4        5.1         5.1     0.00       0.00           0.0       0.0       0.0       3.1       0.0        0.7    0.0       3.1         0.0        0.7
     1966   23      113.0 113.0            42.7        42.7      1.45       1.45           2.9       2.9      20.7       5.4 13.0             2.3 20.7         5.4       13.0         2.3
     1970   27      223.8 223.8 149.4 149.4                      1.34       1.34           3.0       3.0      28.2       8.8 27.2             6.0 28.2         8.8       27.2         6.0
     1973   30      311.0 311.0 238.5 238.5                      1.25       1.25           2.6       2.6      29.6 10.9 30.2                  8.4 29.6 10.9              30.2         8.4
     1975   32      366.1 366.1 294.2 294.2                      1.16       1.16           2.2       2.2      28.1 11.9 28.3                  9.7 28.1 11.9              28.3         9.7
     1979   36      469.1 469.1 397.0 397.0                      1.01       1.01           1.8       1.8      26.2 13.5 26.2 11.5 26.2 13.5                              26.2        11.5
     1983   40      569.1 569.1 495.6 495.6                      1.01       1.01           1.6       1.6      25.5 14.7 25.1 12.9 25.5 14.7                              25.1        12.9
     1988   45      701.7 701.7 624.8 624.8                        .84       .84           1.5       1.5      27.0 16.1 26.3 14.4 27.0 16.1                              26.3        14.4
     1993   50      826.7 846.0 746.5 764.2                        .77       .72           1.0       1.3      25.5 17.0 24.8 15.4 29.4 17.4                              28.4        15.8
     1998   55      959.8 979.1 875.0 892.7                        .61       .61           1.2       1.2      27.1 17.9 26.2 16.4 27.1 18.3                              26.3        16.7

     a
       100 largest: Average height and d.b.h. of the 100 largest trees per acre (estimated from d.b.h. and HT-d.b.h. curves).
     b
       QMD: Quadratic mean diameter at breast height.
     c
       Volume: All volumes are total stem cubic (CVTS) or merchantable cubic to a 15.25-cm top diameter (CV6), inside bark.
     d
       d/D: Average d.b.h. cut : average d.b.h. before thinning.
     e
       Cumulative yield: net = standing + thinning; gross = standing + thinning + mortality; yield does not include any volume removed in a Calibration cut. Volume (CVTS)
     removed in thinnings = 202.9 cubic meters (43 percent of the total gross yield at the time of the last thinning). Volume (CVTS) in mortality = 19.3 cubic meters (2 percent
     of the total gross yield).
     Table 24a—Stand development table for treatment 7, per-acre basis (plots 12, 14, and 19)

                                                 After thinning                                                Removed in thinning                                                                Mortality
                       40 largesta                                    Volumec                                       Volume                         Avg. volume                                                  Volume
            Stand                                              Basal                                          Basal                                                                                 Basal
     Year   age       HT       D.b.h. Trees         QMDb       area CVTS CV6                   Trees      QMD area CVTS CV6                        CVTS CV6           d/Dd     Trees      QMD       area      CVTS       CV6
                                                                 2             3                                         2                     3                                                        2            3
            Yr        Ft         In  No.              In       Ft    - - - Ft - - -            No.         In        Ft - - - - - - - - Ft         ---------                       No.     In         Ft      - - - Ft - - -
     1963   20       39          7.2 328             5.3      50.1    754         75             0         0.0       0.0    0         0             0.0  0.0           0.00         0      0.0        0.0         0      0
     1966   23       49          9.3 323             6.9      84.9 1568         612              5         6.1       1.0 18           5             3.6  1.7            .88         0        .0        .0         0      0
     1970   27       62         11.6 287             8.9     124.5 2936       1993              37         8.6      14.9 363       239              9.8  7.5            .97         0        .0        .0         0      0
     1973   30       71         13.0 262            10.3     150.0 4091       3243             25          9.2      11.6 316       223             12.6  9.7            .91         0        .0        .0         0      0
     1975   32       77         13.8 243            11.1     162.3 4797       4019             17          9.1       7.5 221       153             13.0  9.0            .83         2      5.2         .2         6      0
     1979   36       88         15.3 225            12.3     186.2 6273       5544             13         11.4       9.4 324       273             24.9 21.0            .93         5      8.7        2.0       66     46
     1983   40      100         16.8 223            13.5     221.1 8360       7611               0          .0        .0    0         0              .0   .0            .00         2      5.9         .3         9      0
     1988   45      112         18.2 213            14.9     256.0 10803 10050                   0          .0        .0    0         0              .0   .0            .00        10      6.9        2.6       84     28
     1993   50      125         19.6 208            15.9     287.6 13373 12564                   0          .0        .0    0         0              .0   .0            .00         5      9.8        2.6      105     80
     1998   55      134         20.8 202            16.9     312.9 15403 14560                   0          .0        .0    0         0              .0   .0            .00         7     11.7        5.0     231 198

                           Cumulative yielde                   QMD growth             BA growth                Net volume growth                       Gross volume growth
                      Net  Gross Net                Gross                                            CVTS CVTS                CV6       CV6        CVTS CVTS          CV6      CV6
                      CVTS CVTS CV6                 CV6         Net       Surv.       Net      Gross PAI MAI                  PAI       MAI        PAI  MAI           PAI      MAI
                - - - - - - - - - Ft 3 - - - - - - - - - -     - - - - -In - - - -    - - - - Ft 2 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Ft 3 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     1963   20   754         754           75         75       0.00        0.00        0.0        0.0       0       38          0         4         0       38           0           4
     1966   23 1586        1586          616         616        .55          .55     11.9       11.9 277            69       180         27 277             69        180          27
     1970   27 3318 3318 2237 2237                              .49          .49     13.6       13.6 433          123        405         83 433           123         405          83
     1973   30 4788        4788        3709        3709         .42          .42     12.4       12.4 490          160        491       124 490            160         491        124
     1975   32 5716        5721        4639 4639                .35          .33       9.9      10.0 464          179        465       145 467            179         465        145
     1979   36 7515        7587        6436        6483         .30          .29       8.3        8.8 450         209        449       179 466            211         461        180
     1983   40 9602        9683        8504        8551         .29          .28       8.7        8.8 522         240        517       213 524            242         517        214
     1988   45 12045 12209 10942 11016                          .28         .23        7.0        7.5 488         268        488       243 505            271         493        245
     1993   50 14615 14884 13456 13610                          .21         .20        6.3        6.9 514         292        503       269 535            298         519        272
     1998   55 16645 17145 15453 15804                          .19         .17        5.0        6.0 406         303        399       281 452            312         439        287

     a
       40 largest: Average height and d.b.h. of the 40 largest trees per acre (estimated from d.b.h. and HT-d.b.h. curves).
     b
       QMD: Quadratic mean diameter at breast height.
     c
       Volume: All volumes are total stem cubic (CVTS) or merchantable cubic to a 6-in top diameter (CV6), inside bark.
     d
       d/D: Average d.b.h. cut : average d.b.h. before thinning.
     e
       Cumulative yield: net = standing + thinning; gross = standing + thinning + mortality; yield does not include any volume removed in a Calibration cut. Volume (CVTS)
     removed in thinnings = 1242 cubic feet (16 percent of the total gross yield at the time of the last thinning). Volume (CVTS) in mortality = 500 cubic feet (3 percent of the
     total gross yield).




75
76
     Table 24b—Stand development table for treatment 7, per-hectare basis (plots 12, 14, and 19)

                                               After thinning                                                 Removed in thinning                                                                Mortality
                     100 largesta                                       Volumec                                               Volume             Avg. volume                                                  Volume
            Stand                                           Basal                                            Basal                                                                                 Basal
     Year   age      HT      D.b.h. Trees        QMDb       area CVTS                CV6       Trees      QMD area CVTS               CV6        CVTS CV6           d/Dd     Trees        QMD      area      CVTS       CV6
                                                              2                  3                                    2                      3                                                         2            3
            Yr       m       Cm    No.           Cm         m       ----m -----                No.        Cm        m    --------m ---------                                   No.        Cm         m       ---m ---
     1963   20      12.3      18.3 811           13.4      11.5      53.3    5.8                 0         0.0      0.0    0.0  0.0 0.0   0.0                        0.00        0         0.0       0.0       0.0  0.0
     1966   23      15.3      23.5 799           17.6      19.5     110.3   43.3               12         15.5        .2   1.8  0.8  .1    .0                         .88        0          .0        .0        .0   .0
     1970   27      19.5      29.6 708           22.7      28.6     206.0  140.0                91        22.0       3.4 25.9 17.2   .3    .2                         .97        0          .0        .0        .0   .0
     1973   30      22.3      33.1 646           26.1      34.5     286.9  227.5                62        23.5       2.7 22.6 16.1   .4    .3                         .91        0          .0        .0        .0   .0
     1975   32      24.0      35.2 601           28.1      37.3     336.3  281.9                41        23.2       1.7 16.0 11.2   .4    .3                         .83        4        13.2        .1       0.9  0.5
     1979   36      27.5      38.9 556           31.4      42.8     439.6  388.6                33        28.9       2.2 23.2 19.6   .7    .6                         .93       12        22.0        .5       5.1  3.7
     1983   40      31.1      42.5 552           34.3      50.8     585.7  533.3                 0          .0        .0    .0   .0  .0    .0                         .00        4        15.0        .1       1.1  0.5
     1988   45      34.8      46.3 527           37.8      58.9     756.7  704.0                 0          .0        .0    .0   .0  .0    .0                         .00       25        17.5        .6       6.4  2.4
     1993   50      38.5      49.8 515           40.5      66.2     936.6  879.9                 0          .0        .0    .0   .0  .0    .0                         .00       12        24.8        .6       7.8  6.1
     1998   55      41.5      52.8 498           42.9      72.0    1078.7 1019.7                 0          .0        .0    .0   .0  .0    .0                         .00       16        29.8       1.1      16.7 14.3

                          Cumulative yielde                 QMD growth                 BA growth              Net volume growth                      Gross volume growth
                     Net  Gross Net              Gross                                                    CVTS CVTS CV6                CV6       CVTS      CVTS       CV6       CV6
                     CVTS CVTS CV6               CV6         Net      Surv.           Net      Gross      PAI  MAI  PAI                MAI       PAI        MAI       PAI       MAI
                  - - - - - - - - - m3 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -Cm - - -       - - - - m2 - - - -    - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - m3 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     1963   20      53.3        53.3        5.8         5.8 0.00        0.00            0.0       0.0       0.0       3.1       0.0       0.8     0.0       3.1         0.0        0.8
     1966   23    111.5 111.5             43.7        43.7 1.39         1.39            2.7       2.7     19.9        5.3 13.1            2.4 19.9          5.3       13.1         2.4
     1970   27    232.7 232.7 157.1 157.1 1.24                          1.24            3.1       3.1     30.8        9.9 28.9            6.3 30.8          9.1       28.9         6.3
     1973   30    335.7 335.7 260.1 260.1 1.06                          1.06            2.8       2.8     34.8 11.7 34.9                  9.2 34.8 11.7               34.9         9.2
     1975   32    400.6 401.0 325.3 325.3                       .88       .85           2.3       2.3     33.0 13.0 33.1 10.6 33.2 13.0                               33.1        10.6
     1979   36    526.6 531.6 451.0 454.3                       .77       .74           1.9       2.0     32.0 15.1 31.9 13.0 33.1 15.3                               32.8        13.1
     1983   40    672.7 678.3 595.8 599.0                       .73       .71           2.0       2.0     37.0 17.3 36.7 15.4 37.2 17.4                               36.7        15.5
     1988   45    843.6 855.1 766.5 771.6                       .70       .58           1.6       1.7     34.7 19.2 34.6 17.5 35.9 19.5                               35.0        17.6
     1993   50   1023.6 1042.4 942.4 953.2                      .54       .50           1.5       1.6     36.5 21.0 35.7 19.3 38.0 21.3                               36.8        19.6
     1998   55   1165.7 1200.7 1082.2 1106.8                    .48       .42           1.2       1.4     28.9 21.7 28.4 20.2 32.2 22.3                               31.2        20.6

     a
       100 largest: Average height and d.b.h. of the 100 largest trees per acre (estimated from d.b.h. and HT-d.b.h. curves).
     b
       QMD: Quadratic mean diameter at breast height.
     c
       Volume: All volumes are total stem cubic (CVTS) or merchantable cubic to a 15.25-cm top diameter (CV6), inside bark.
     d
       d/D: Average d.b.h. cut : average d.b.h. before thinning.
     e
       Cumulative yield: net = standing + thinning; gross = standing + thinning + mortality; yield does not include any volume removed in a Calibration cut. Volume (CVTS)
     removed in thinnings = 87.0 cubic meters (16 percent of the total gross yield at the time of the last thinning). Volume (CVTS) in mortality = 35.0 cubic meters (3 percent
     of the total gross yield).
     Table 25a-Stand development table for treatment 8, per-acre basis (plots 6, 13, and 16)

                                                  After thinning                                                 Removed in thinning                                                                Mortality
                       40 largesta                                      Volumec                                       Volume                         Avg. volume                                            Volume
            Stand                                                Basal                                          Basal                                                                                 Basal
     Year   age        HT       D.b.h. Trees         QMDb        area CVTS CV6                   Trees      QMD area CVTS CV6                        CVTS CV6           d/Dd     Trees      QMD       area CVTS CV6
                                                                   2             3                                        2                      3
            Yr        Ft          In      No.         In         Ft    - - - Ft - - -             No.        In       Ft - - - - - - - - Ft          ---------                      No.      In         Ft 2    - - - Ft 3 - - -
     1963   20       40           7.3     337         5.3       50.4    776         87             0         0.0       0.0   0         0              0.0  0.0           0.00        0       0.0        0.0         0        0
     1966   23       49           9.4     327         7.0       85.8 1608         634              8         6.6       2.0 37        10               4.6  1.4            .96        2       5.0         .2         4        0
     1970   27       63          11.8     275         8.9      118.7 2837       1925              52         8.6      20.6 489      316               9.4  7.0            .97        0         .0        .0         0        0
     1973   30       72          13.2     242        10.2      136.8 3778       2982              33         9.8      17.3 483      364              14.6 11.4            .96        0         .0        .0         0        0
     1975   32       78          14.0     222        11.0      144.6 4281       3560              18        10.5      11.0 323      264              17.9 15.5            .96        2       5.0         .2         5        0
     1979   36       89          15.5     187        12.3      154.3 5210       4595              33        11.5      24.2 824      700              25.0 21.2            .95        2       4.8         .2         5        0
     1983   40       99          16.8     183        13.7      186.4 7014       6395               0          .0        .0   0         0               .0   .0            .00        3       5.9         .6       20         0
     1988   45      112          18.5     180        15.1      222.4 9312       8655               0          .0        .0   0         0               .0   .0            .00        3       7.0         .9       32       16
     1993   50      123          20.0     170        16.5      251.1 11544 10880                   0          .0        .0   0         0               .0   .0            .00       10       7.8        3.3      127       61
     1998   55      132          21.3     167        17.5      277.9 13502 12796                   0          .0        .0   0         0               .0   .0            .00        3       8.7        1.4       61       40

                           Cumulative yielde                     QMD growth             BA growth                Net volume growth                       Gross volume growth
                       Net  Gross Net                Gross                                             CVTS CVTS CV6                      CV6        CVTS CVTS          CV6      CV6
                       CVTS CVTS CV6                 CV6         Net        Surv.      Net       Gross PAI MAI PAI                        MAI        PAI   MAI          PAI      MAI
                - - - - - - - - - - Ft 3 - - - - - - - - - -     - - - - -In - - - -    - - - - Ft 2 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Ft 3 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     1963   20    776         776           87         87        0.00        0.00        0.0        0.0       0       39          0         4         0       39           0           4
     1966   23 1645         1649          644        644          .57         .57      12.5       12.6 290            72       186         28 291             72        186          28
     1970   27 3363 3367 2252 2252                                .48         .48      13.4       13.4 430          125        402         83 430           125         402          83
     1973   30 4787         4791        3672        3672          .41         .41      11.8       11.8 475          160        473       122 475            160         473        122
     1975   32 5613         5622        4514        4514          .36         .34        9.4        9.5 413         175        421       141 416            176         421        141
     1979   36 7366         7380        6249        6249          .32         .31        8.5        8.5 438         205        434       174 439            205         434        174
     1983   40 9170         9203        8049        8050          .34         .32        8.0        8.2 451         229        450       201 456            230         450        201
     1988   45 11468 11534 10309 10325                            .28         .26       7.2         7.4 460         255        452       229 466            256         455        229
     1993   50 13700 13892 12534 12611                            .28         .22       5.7         6.4 446         274        445       251 472            278         457        252
     1998   55 15658 15913 14450 14568                            .21         .18       5.4         5.6 392         285        383       263 404            289         391        265

     a
       40 largest: Average height and d.b.h. of the 40 largest trees per acre (estimated from d.b.h. and HT-d.b.h. curves).
     b
       QMD: Quadratic mean diameter at breast height.
     c
       Volume: All volumes are total stem cubic (CVTS) or merchantable cubic to a 6-in top diameter (CV6), inside bark.
     d
       d/D: Average d.b.h. cut : average d.b.h. before thinning.
     e
       Cumulative yield: net = standing + thinning; gross = standing + thinning + mortality; yield does not include any volume removed in a Calibration cut. Volume (CVTS)
     removed in thinnings = 2156 cubic feet (29 percent of the total gross yield at the time of the last thinning). Volume (CVTS) in mortality = 254 cubic feet (2 percent of the
     total gross yield).




77
78
     Table 25b—Stand development table for treatment 8, per-hectare basis (plots 6, 13, and 16)

                                                After thinning                                             Removed in thinning                                                                 Mortality
                      100 largesta                                        Volumec                                          Volume             Avg. volume                                                   Volume
            Stand                                              Basal                                       Basal                                                                                 Basal
     Year   age      HT       D.b.h. Trees         QMDb        area CVTS          CV6       Trees      QMD area CVTS               CV6        CVTS CV6           d/Dd     Trees        QMD       area      CVTS       CV6
                                                                 2           3                                      2                     3                                                          2            3
            Yr       m        Cm    No.            Cm           m     ---m ---              No.        Cm         m --------m ---------                                      No.       Cm          m       ---m ---
     1963   20      12.7       18.6 832            13.4        11.6    54.8    6.6            0         0.0       0.0  0.0  0.0 0.0  0.0                          0.00        0          0.0       0.0       0.0 0.0
     1966   23      15.5       23.9 807            17.7        19.7   113.1  44.8            21        16.8        .5  3.1  1.2  .1   .1                           .96        4         12.7        .1      0.8  0.5
     1970   27      19.7       29.9 679            22.7        27.3   199.1 135.3           128        21.7       4.7 34.7 22.6  .3   .2                           .97        0           .0        .0        .0  .0
     1973   30      22.5       33.4 597            25.9        31.5   265.0 209.2            82        24.8       4.0 34.3 26.0  .4   .3                           .96        0           .0        .0        .0  .0
     1975   32      24.2       35.5 548            27.8        33.2   300.2 249.7            45        26.7       2.5 23.1 18.0  .5   .4                           .96        4         12.7        .1      0.8  0.5
     1979   36      27.6       39.3 461            31.4        35.5   365.2 322.1            82        29.3       5.6 58.2 49.5  .7   .6                           .95        4         12.2        .0      0.9  0.5
     1983   40      30.8       42.8 453            34.8        42.9   491.5 448.2             0          .0        .0   .0   .0  .0   .0                           .00        8         15.0        .1       1.9 0.5
     1988   45      34.5       47.0 445            38.3        51.1   652.3 606.4             0          .0        .0   .0   .0  .0   .0                           .00        8         17.7        .2       2.8 1.6
     1993   50      38.1       50.7 420            41.8        57.8   808.6 762.1             0          .0        .0   .0   .0  .0   .0                           .00       25         19.7        .8       9.4 4.8
     1998   55      40.9       54.0 412            44.4        63.9   945.7 896.2             0          .0        .0   .0   .0  .0   .0                           .00        8         22.2        .3       4.8 3.3

                          Cumulative yielde                    QMD growth           BA growth              Net volume growth                      Gross volume growth
                     Net  Gross Net                Gross                                          CVTS           CVTS CV6           CV6       CVTS CVTS            CV6     CV6
                     CVTS CVTS CV6                 CV6         Net       Surv.      Net     Gross PAI            MAI  PAI           MAI       PAI  MAI             PAI     MAI
                  - - - - - - - - m3 - - - - - - - - - - - -    - - - -Cm - - -   - - - - m2 - - - -    - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - m3 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     1963   20      54.8        54.8        6.6         6.6     0.00      0.00       0.0       0.0       0.0       3.2       0.0       0.8     0.0       3.2         0.0        0.8
     1966   23    115.6 115.9             45.6        45.6      1.44      1.44       2.9       2.9     20.8        5.5 13.5            2.5 20.9          5.5       13.5         2.5
     1970   27    235.8 236.2 158.2 158.2                       1.21      1.21       3.1       3.1     30.6        9.2 28.6            6.3 30.6          9.2       28.6         6.3
     1973   30    335.9 335.9 257.5 257.5                       1.05      1.05       2.7       2.7     33.7 11.7 33.6                  9.1 33.7 11.7               33.6         9.1
     1975   32    393.4 394.0 316.5 316.5                         .91       .87      2.2       2.2     29.4 12.8 30.0 10.4 29.6 12.8                               30.0        10.4
     1979   36    516.1 517.1 437.9 437.9                         .80       .78      1.9       2.0     31.2 14.8 30.9 12.7 31.3 14.8                               30.9        12.7
     1983   40    642.4 644.7 564.0 564.0                         .85       .80      1.8       1.9     32.1 16.5 32.0 14.6 32.4 16.6                               32.0        14.6
     1988   45    803.3 807.9 722.1 723.3                         .71       .66      1.7       1.7     32.7 18.3 32.1 16.5 33.1 18.4                               32.4        16.6
     1993   50    959.5 973.0 877.9 883.3                         .71       .55      1.3       1.5     31.7 19.7 31.6 18.0 33.5 19.9                               32.5        18.2
     1998   55   1096.6 1114.4 1012.0 1020.2                      .52       .46      1.2       1.3     27.9 20.4 27.3 18.9 28.8 20.8                               27.9        19.0

     a
       100 largest: Average height and d.b.h. of the 100 largest trees per acre (estimated from d.b.h. and HT-d.b.h. curves).
     b
       QMD: Quadratic mean diameter at breast height.
     c
       Volume: All volumes are total stem cubic (CVTS) or merchantable cubic to a 15.25-cm top diameter (CV6), inside bark.
     d
       d/D: Average d.b.h. cut : average d.b.h. before thinning.
     e
       Cumulative yield: net = standing + thinning; gross = standing + thinning + mortality; yield does not include any volume removed in a Calibration cut. Volume (CVTS)
     removed in thinnings = 150.9 cubic meters (29 percent of the total gross yield at the time of the last thinning). Volume (CVTS) in mortality = 17.8 cubic meters (2 percent
     of the total gross yield).
     Table 26a—Stand development table for control, per-acre basis (plots 10, 22, and 26)

                                                After thinning                                                Removed in thinning                                                               Mortality
                                    a                                                c
                       40 largest                                     Volume                                        Volume                       Avg. volume                                                 Volume
            Stand                                              Basal                                         Basal                                                                           Basal
     Year   age       HT       D.b.h. Trees        QMDb        area CVTS CV6                   Trees      QMD area CVTS CV6                      CVTS CV6            d/Dd     Trees      QMD area           CVTS   CV6
            Yr        Ft        In    No.           In         Ft 2  - - - Ft 3 - - -            No.        In        Ft 2    - - - - - - - Ft 3 - - - - - - - - -              No.       In       Ft 2 - - - Ft 3 - - -
     1963   20       42          7.6 1718           3.8      138.0 1996           138            0          0.0       0.0       0         0         0.0       0.0     0.00        0       0.0       0.0     0        0
     1966   23       51          9.1 1637           4.6      184.7 3392           607            0           .0        .0       0         0          .0         .0     .00       87       2.1       2.0   27         0
     1970   27       65         10.9 1272           5.8      228.6 5411         1891             0           .0        .0       0         0          .0         .0     .00      368       2.5      12.7 222          0
     1973   30       74         12.0 1087           6.6      255.9 6931         3200             0           .0        .0       0         0          .0         .0     .00      185       3.0       9.3 189          0
     1975   32       80         12.7 938            7.2      261.3 7611         4020             0           .0        .0       0         0          .0         .0     .00      148       4.0      12.9 306        19
     1979   36       90         13.8 767            8.2      277.9 9285         5755             0           .0        .0       0         0          .0         .0     .00      172       4.3      17.2 479        26
     1983   40       99         15.0 653            9.1      295.1 10898        7631             0           .0        .0       0         0          .0         .0     .00      113       4.9      14.8 460        28
     1988   45      111         16.3 488           10.6      296.4 12161        9720             0           .0        .0       0         0          .0         .0     .00      165       6.1      34.0 1209 254
     1993   50      122         17.6 377           12.1      297.5 13376 11604                   0           .0        .0       0         0          .0         .0     .00      112       7.1      31.1 1210 472
     1998   55      130         19.0 307           13.5      299.9 14312 12924                   0           .0        .0       0         0          .0         .0     .00       70       8.9      30.1 1297 867

                           Cumulative yielde                   QMD growth                BA growth             Net volume growth                      Gross volume growth
                      Net  Gross Net               Gross                                             CVTS CVTS CV6                     CV6       CVTS CVTS           CV6      CV6
                      CVTS CVTS CV6                CV6          Net        Surv.         Net   Gross PAI MAI PAI                       MAI       PAI  MAI            PAI      MAI
                 - - - - - - - - Ft3 - - - - - - - - - - -     - - - - -In - - - -   - - - - Ft 2 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Ft 3 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     1963   20 1996        1996         138         138         0.00        0.00       0.0        0.0      0     100           0         7         0     100            0           7
     1966   23 3392        3419         607         607          .24          .21    15.6        16.2 465        147        156         26 474           149         156          26
     1970   27 5411        5660 1891 1891                        .30          .19    11.0        14.2 505        200        321         70 560           210         321          70
     1973   30 6931        7369       3200 3200                  .28          .16      9.1       12.2 507        231        436       107 570            246         436        107
     1975   32 7611        8355       4020        4038           .30          .13      2.7        9.2 340        238        410       126 493            261         419        126
     1979   36 9285 10508 5755                    5800           .25          .13      4.1        8.4 419        258        434       160 538            292         440        161
     1983   40 10898 12582 7631 7703                             .23          .13      4.3        8.0 403        272        469       191 518            315         476        193
     1988   45 12161 15053 9720 10047                            .29          .13        .2       7.0 253        270        418       216 494            335         469        223
     1993   50 13376 17479 11604 12402                           .30          .13        .2       6.4 243        268        377       232 485            350         471        248
     1998   55 14312 19711 12924 14589                           .28          .15        .5       6.5 187        260        264       235 446            358         437        265

     a
       40 largest: Average height and d.b.h. of the 40 largest trees per acre (estimated from d.b.h. and HT-d.b.h. curves).
     b
       QMD: Quadratic mean diameter at breast height.
     c
       Volume: All volumes are total stem cubic (CVTS) or merchantable cubic to a 6-in top diameter (CV6), inside bark.
     d
       d/D: Average d.b.h. cut : average d.b.h. before thinning.
     e
       Cumulative yield: net = standing + thinning; gross = standing + thinning + mortality; yield does not include any volume removed in a Calibration cut. Volume (CVTS) in
     mortality = 5399 cubic feet (27 percent of the total gross yield).




79
80
     Table 26b—Stand development table for control, per-hectare basis (plots 10, 22, and 26)

                                              After thinning                                             Removed in thinning                                                                Mortality
                                   a                                            c
                     100 largest                                  Volume                                             Volume                 Avg. volume                                                  Volume
            Stand                                          Basal                                               Basal                                                                          Basal
     Year   age      HT      D.b.h. Trees        QMDb      area CVTS CV6                  Trees      QMD       area CVTS CV6                CVTS CV6           d/Dd     Trees        QMD      area      CVTS       CV6
                                                             2             3                                      2                     3                                                         2            3
            Yr       m       Cm     No.          Cm        m       ---m ---               No.        Cm         m --------m ---------                                    No.         Cm         m       ---m ---
     1963   20      13.4      19.2 4244           9.8     31.7     140.2  10.2             0          0.0       0.0 0.0  0.0 0.0   0.0                          0.00       0          0.0       0.0       0.0  0.0
     1966   23      16.1      23.0 4043          11.6     42.5     237.9  43.0             0           .0        .0  .0   .0  .0    .0                           .00     214          5.3        .5       2.4  0.
     1970   27      20.3      27.6 3141          14.7     52.6     379.2 132.9             0           .0        .0  .0   .0  .0    .0                           .00     910          6.4       2.9      16.1  0.5
     1973   30      23.2      30.5 2684          16.8     58.9     485.7 224.5             0           .0        .0  .0   .0  .0    .0                           .00     457          7.7       2.1      13.7  0.5
     1975   32      25.0      32.2 2318          18.3     60.1     533.3 281.9             0           .0        .0  .0   .0  .0    .0                           .00     366         10.2       3.0      21.9  1.8
     1979   36      27.8      35.1 1894          20.8     63.9     650.5 403.4             0           .0        .0  .0   .0  .0    .0                           .00     424         10.9       3.9      34.0  2.3
     1983   40      30.7      38.1 1614          23.2     67.9     763.4 534.6             0           .0        .0  .0   .0  .0    .0                           .00     280         12.4       3.4      32.7  2.5
     1988   45      34.2      41.5 1206          26.9     68.2     851.8 680.9             0           .0        .0  .0   .0  .0    .0                           .00     408         15.6       7.8      85.1 18.3
     1993   50      37.8      44.7 930           30.7     68.4     936.9 812.8             0           .0        .0  .0   .0  .0    .0                           .00     276         18.2       7.2      85.2 33.5
     1998   55      40.2      48.3 757           34.2     69.0    1002.2 905.1             0           .0        .0  .0   .0  .0    .0                           .00     173         22.6       6.9      91.3 61.2

                        Cumulative yielde                  QMD growth               BA growth            Net volume growth                      Gross volume growth
                     Net  Gross Net              Gross                                          CVTS CVTS CV6                    CV6        CVTS      CVTS       CV6       CV6
                     CVTS CVTS CV6               CV6       Net         Surv.        Net   Gross PAI  MAI PAI                     MAI        PAI       MAI        PAI       MAI
                  - - - - - - - - m3 - - - - - - - - -      - - - - -Cm - - -   - - - - m2 - - - -    - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - m3 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
     1963   20     140.2 140.2             10.2        10.2 0.00       0.00        0.0       0.0       0.0       7.5       0.0       1.0     0.0       7.5         0.0        1.0
     1966   23     237.9 239.8            43.0         43.0   .62       .54        3.6       3.7     33.1 10.8 11.4                  2.3 33.7 10.9               11.4         2.3
     1970   27     379.2 396.7 132.9 132.9                    .76       .48        2.5       3.3     35.8 14.5 23.0                  5.4 39.7 15.2               23.0         5.4
     1973   30     485.7 516.4 224.5 224.5                    .70       .42        2.1       2.8     36.0 16.7 31.1                  8.0 40.4 17.7               31.1         8.0
     1975   32     533.3 585.4 281.9 283.2                    .77       .33          .6      2.1     24.3 17.1 29.2                  9.3 35.0 18.9               29.8         9.3
     1979   36     650.5 736.1 403.4 406.5                    .63       .33        1.0       1.9     29.8 18.6 30.9 11.7 38.2 20.9                               31.3        11.8
     1983   40     763.4 881.2 534.6 539.7                    .60       .32        1.0       1.8     28.7 19.6 33.3 13.9 36.8 22.5                               33.8        14.0
     1988   45     851.8 1054.2 680.9 703.8                   .74       .33          .1      1.6     18.2 19.4 29.8 15.6 35.1 23.9                               33.3        16.1
     1993   50     936.9 1224.0 812.8 868.7                   .75       .34          .1      1.5     17.5 19.2 26.9 16.7 34.5 25.0                               33.5        17.9
     1998   55   1002.3 1380.2 905.1 1021.7                   .71       .38          .1      1.5     13.6 18.7 19.0 16.9 31.7 25.6                               31.1        19.1

     a
       100 largest: Average height and d.b.h. of the 100 largest trees per acre (estimated from d.b.h. and HT-d.b.h. curves).
     b
       QMD: Quadratic mean diameter at breast height.
     c
       Volume: All volumes are total stem cubic (CVTS) or merchantable cubic to a 15.25-cm top diameter (CV6), inside bark.
     d
       d/D: Average d.b.h. cut : average d.b.h. before thinning.
     e
       Cumulative yield: net = standing + thinning; gross = standing + thinning + mortality; yield does not include any volume removed in a Calibration cut. Volume (CVTS) in
     mortality = 377.9 cubic meters (27 percent of the total gross yield).
The Forest Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture is dedicated to the principle
of multiple use management of the Nation’s forest resources for sustained yields of
wood, water, forage, wildlife, and recreation. Through forestry research, cooperation
with the States and private forest owners, and management of the National Forests
and National Grasslands, it strives—as directed by Congress—to provide increasingly
greater service to a growing Nation.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs
and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, gender, religion, age, disability,
political beliefs, sexual orientation, or marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases
apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for
communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should
contact USDA’s TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).

To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights,
Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC
20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice and TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity
provider and employer.




                Pacific Northwest Research Station

 Web site                       http://www.fs.fed.us/pnw
 Telephone                      (503) 808-2592
 Publication requests           (503) 808-2138
 FAX                            (503) 808-2130
 E-mail                         desmith@fs.fed.us
 Mailing address                Publications Distribution
                                Pacific Northwest Research Station
                                P.O. Box 3890
                                Portland, OR 97208-3890
